There's actually a lot going on behind the scenes to make Smart Reply work. Inbox uses machine learning to recognize emails that need responses and to generate the natural language responses on the fly. If you're interested in how Smart Reply works, including how researchers got machine learning to work on a data set that they never saw, you can read more about it on the Google Research Blog.

And much like how Inbox gets better when you report spam, the responses you choose (or don't choose!) help improve future suggestions. For example, when Smart Reply was tested at Google, a common suggestion in the workplace was "I love you." Thanks to Googler feedback, Smart Reply is now SFW :)

Smart Reply will be rolling out later this week on both Google Play and the App Store in English. If you've got a lot of emails on your plate, now's a great time to try Inbox and get through them faster than ever.. By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app

Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview

A few days ago, I received a short, effective email in my inbox: "Sounds good!"

I had to pause. Although that was the response I wanted — I was arranging a meeting — I wondered: Did he really send that, or did he simply hit Google's automated response suggestions at the bottom?

In recent weeks, Gmail's "Smart Reply" feature has been released to an ever-rising amount of the web email service's over 1.4 billion users, meaning that soon a large percentage of the world's population will get access to Google's cheery, direct suggestions when it becomes a default feature next month.

This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now.

The actual language of the suggestions is created with machine learning, a family of technologies that is sometimes called artificial intelligence in the non-technical world.

Advertisement

Google

Google's software crawls billions of emails on Gmail, and then uses software to suggest phrases drawn from that database that you might want to use to confirm a coffee at 4 PM at Blue Bottle. 10% of responses are generated through the Smart Reply feature, according to The Wall Street Journal.

But it hasn't always worked well enough — a director of product management at Google, Ajit Varma, shared some funny early bugs with the Journal.

Related stories

From the story:

Google said an early prototype of the feature had “a propensity to respond with ‘I love you’ to seemingly anything,” forcing it to tweak the algorithm. “You don’t want to respond that to your boss,” Mr. Varma said.

Advertisement

Imagine trying to organize a conference call with a client and accidentally sending "I love you."

Another funny suggestion the software kept repeating is a nod to Google's neighbors in Silicon Valley, Apple. Apparently, the software thought "Sent from my iPhone" was a good way to respond to emails.

That's the default signature on the default email app on iPhones, so it shows up all the time in Google's data. And Google's machine learning software, as smart as it was, isn't actually a human, so it didn't realize that was a clever bit of branding, and not any kind of useful information.

Same with "I love you" — while Smart Reply is impressive, it doesn't understand social context yet.

Advertisement

But the software does learn: Google says that as you use it more, the style and tone will become more personalized to you.

Sounds good!. If you use Google products for email, you may have noticed those suggested replies at the bottom of your mobile inbox. These give users options to choose short and snappy responses to emails, such as, “Will do,” “I am working on that now,” and “Thanks, you too!” This feature is called Smart Reply, and it uses a type of AI called an artificial neural network. It basically “learns” how individuals communicate with each other and then mirrors those interactions in its suggested replies. The feature has become a hit among those with busy lives who need to respond to their emails but don’t always have the time to do so.

Google originally rolled out this feature in 2015 with its app Inbox, but the company added a newer version of this same technology to the Gmail app in the spring of 2017. It immediately garnered attention from techies and average users alike. It’s so fast! It’s so convenient! It’s so accurate! It didn’t seem like anyone had much criticism to lodge about this feature, unlike some of Google’s other ideas, such as Project Fi, the company’s attempt at a cellular service.

And while some have concerns about privacy, there isn’t an actual person reading your messages. Google already scans the contents of your emails to provide you with tailored advertisements anyway. Gmail has never been truly private, but Smart Reply itself isn’t really to blame for that shortcoming.

So, what’s the problem? It’s not really that Smart Reply presents new challenges we must overcome in the digital age, but it does seem to be a symptom of a much wider-ranging issue—one that’s going to be a lot harder to solve than by simply turning off a function in your settings.

The celebration of Smart Reply and other suggestion-response features like it reveal the ever-quickening pace of our lives and what we choose to prioritize with the time we have available. Communication has, largely, become more of a chore than a conscious connection with another person, making our relationships shallower and less honest but leading us to believe we’re actually connecting more deeply with others than ever before. For example, Facebook users are more likely to receive an onslaught of well wishes on their birthdays than those who don’t use the site. But how many of your friends would know it was your birthday if not for the notification they received on their mobile device? How many of them know your address and would have sent you a card? Probably not nearly as many. Therefore, we’re tricked into thinking that we are building strong human connections when we’re just fulfilling what have become basic social obligations.

In our current cultural climate, it has become too time-consuming to write a quick “thank you” email to a client; instead, we opt for a one-click automated response. And while, yes, the responses are based off of how you as an individual use language, the author of the email isn’t writing these responses—a computer is.

Some may roll their eyes at this criticism. So what? It’s the fact that we’re responding that counts. Why does it matter if we type the message ourselves? But there are some indications that Google users do realize that there is a difference between choosing a suggested response and typing one out themselves.. From: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

To: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 11:08 AM

At its annual developers conference earlier this year Google introduced “smart compose,” a new Gmail feature that helps users complete their sentences. Smart compose scans the content of users’ messages and suggests phrases and words, based on things that Google knows about English (i.e., sentences that begin with H often turn out to be “How are you?”) and things Google knows about you. It builds on Gmail’s “smart reply” feature, in which quick responses like “Thanks!” or “See you there” can be sent with a touch of a button.

Advertisement

To understand how these features influence communication, I’m writing in two places: here on my non-smart work email, where I must create sentences and replies from scratch as if this was 2015, and my personal Gmail account, which has smart compose turned on and ready to go.

Are you willing to play along, Gmail?

From: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

To: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 11:10

Sounds good to me!

Advertisement

From: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

To: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 11:16 AM

Excellent.

Smart reply, which this month will become a default feature for all Gmail users, has proved divisive since its April soft launch. Some users say that it spares them time, superfluous taps, and the consequences of their worst impulses (“Got it, thanks” is almost always a safer option than a clever-yet-snide reply one might be tempted to compose). Others say that the suggested replies are either inappropriate—early version suggested “I love you” with unnerving frequency—or, more often, fail to capture the sender’s tone.

For example, you, Personal Gmail, also suggested “Like it!” and “Love it!” as potential replies to my previous message, both of which felt a little too eager.

Advertisement

About one-quarter of the world’s emails are now opened in Gmail. If Google itself is helping dictate the content of those emails, will they still read like the people who wrote them? Or will we end up emailing each other in “Gmail-ese,” a generic English dialect that conveys the substance of messages quickly at the expense of individual style? (For the time being, smart features are only available in English.)

Thoughts?

From: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

To: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 11:57 AM

I’m going to ignore the three possible replies Gmail has suggested here—again: “I like it!” “Love it!” and “Sounds good to me!”—even though the latter is, upon reflection, something I actually say quite often when ready to exit a conversation. Instead, unless it completely derails the substance of the discussion, I’m going to accept any suggestion Gmail tosses me as I type this. (I think that final “this” is superfluous; Gmail apparently does not.)

Advertisement

I was discussing this earlier today with Quartz colleague Cassie Werber in London, who pointed out that the feature has the potential to erode the diversity of the English language. If we’re all being encouraged to “grab” lunch, for example, when typing “Let’s” to a colleague around noon, will we receive fewer invitations to “do,” “have,” or “get together for” lunch—all subtle variations that convey minute but possibly significant changes in tone and style?

As is often the case with new technologies, smart email may also come with built-in (if inadvertent) biases. Smart reply was developed with the help of a bot that analyzed the contents of billions of Gmail messages, a Google product manager explained to the Wall Street Journal. Gmail may have a minority stake in the overall email market, but it’s the overwhelming favorite among younger users, with 61% of emailers aged 19 to 34 and 74% of those aged 14 to 18 preferring Gmail in 2016, according to one survey. In early versions, casual responses like “Sweet!” and “Awesome!” were suggested frequently, which many users found off-putting in professional exchanges.

Speaking of which: The few words or phrases Gmail has suggested as I type have all been sensible. The thing that comes up most frequently in the ghostly gray type of the suggestion box is “?”—a gentle nudge, perhaps, to just hurry up and end a sentence that’s clearly going to be a question.

So: Are we doomed to inboxes full of Gmail-speak?

Advertisement

From: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

To: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 12:31 PM

I don’t think so. AI has been lurking around our digital communications for a while now, helpfully correcting typos in some cases and unhelpfully garbling names and meanings in others. Identifying situations when it’s in our interest to overrule the machine isn’t particularly onerous. iOS has long offered a set of prefabricated text messages to send when declining a call. You only have a split second to decide if “Sorry, I can’t talk right now”—with a period at the end!—will make you sound like a cold-hearted monster to that particular caller, and really, that’s all you need.

Smart email is good at the quick, perfunctory exchanges that fill up much of our inbox: “Got it, thanks” to someone who expects confirmation of receipt; “See you there!” to denote that you are aware of the evening’s plans. Accepting a suggestion is like signing off on the draft of a statement prepared by an assistant who understands you well enough to anticipate what you’ll want to say.

But if you’re temperamentally inclined to care about how you come across in email, you’ll read that draft more carefully, and overrule language that doesn’t adequately convey empathy, or authority, or flirtation, or whatever subtext the words on the screen must carry. The machine may not understand yet when a reply deserves a more nuanced answer; fortunately, we do.

Advertisement

From: Corinne Purtill (Gmail)

To: Corinne Purtill (Quartz)

Mon, Oct 1, 2018 at 12:32 PM

Got it!. Image: Google: Photo: Konstantin Sergeyev

The most recognizable feature of Gmail’s newly rolled-out redesign is the so-called smart reply, wherein bots offer three one-click responses to each mail message. Say your email contains the words “you free for lunch?” The autoreplies Gmail presents will be something like “Sure!” and “Yes!” and “Looking forward to it!” The idea, especially on a small, one-hand phone screen, is that you can tap and send using one thumb, without typing. It’s not clear just how many of these prewritten options there are, or how sophisticated the machine learning behind them is. The AI is not yet sharp enough to offer genuinely useful responses like “Please, for the love of Christ, stop sending me these offers to buy those sandals whose ad I clicked on last month” or emotionally honest ones like “Hey, it would be wonderful if someone in our group cancels our drinks tonight because I would rather stay home and order dan dan noodles while watching Succession.” Until then, we’re stuck with the few dozen simple responses that appear regularly. Some are better than others. Shall we rank? Ok, sounds good!

20. “No worries, thanks for the heads up!”

A disaster. First of all, it’s a seven-word phrase that contains two grammatical errors (a comma splice and the missing hyphen in “heads-up”). And then the phrase “no worries!” injects a note of concern where there was none. Should I in fact be worried? Should I have been worried? The only possible use of this response is when a frantic employee sends an email to the boss about a potential problem, and the boss wants to knock down his or her anxiety a little. I’m not projecting here.

19. “You are so welcome!”

That “so” in the middle is what dooms this one. It’s unusably chirpy mean, really underminer stuff. You use this when someone thanks you for getting the T-shirts in time for rush week. Comes with an unspoken “[asshole!]” at the end. In the South, the equivalent would be “Bless your heart.”

18. “Thank you, you too!”

What does this phrase even mean? Stare at it more, and you’ll understand it less with every passing minute. Plus it’s another goddamn comma-splice run-on sentence. Get these bots a copy of Words Into Type already.

17. “It was great seeing you too!”

The hell with this. Either you didn’t actually think it was great (in which case, sure, send this, why not), or you did, in fact, think it was great (in which case you should probably write something a little more heartfelt and less anodyne).

16. “Love it!”

No editor will ever use this.

15. “Have a great weekend too!”

Isn’t “Have a great weekend” perfectly and explicitly the way you end an email exchange? It all but defines the you-don’t-have-to-respond-to-this genre of messages. Why the hell would you write back?

14. “Cool, thanks!”

“Thanks!” is meaningful. “Cool, thanks!” means … what, exactly? I like what you said, and thank you for saying it? Literally a phrase I have never spoken or typed. But Google will type it for me!

13. & 12. “Yes, he is,” and “No, he’s not.”

Two observations here: The internal commas make the vibe curiously old-fashioned, stilted, almost Victorian. And the flat period, replacing the chirpy bang, inadvertently comes off as relatively dead-eyed, almost angry. “Yes, he is. The man you just made fun of is indeed the same one whose blood I wear in a vial around my neck. Care to continue?”

11. “It was my pleasure!”

Amid all the “Cool!” and “Very cool!” replies appears this oddly formal one. Useful for the 49-year-old mid-level manager who’s said yes to his or her third “informational interview” in a week. I’m not projecting here.

10. “I’ll ask.”

This one has potential. No exclamation point of fake enthusiasm here; what it means is “if it were up to me I’d tell you to go to hell, but since it is not up to me, I’m happy to deflect responsibility for your coming rejection onto someone else. Either way, don’t get your hopes up.”

9. “I’ll look into it.”

See “I’ll ask,” above. This is the version for graduate-level players only. (The Ph.D. version reads “I’ll look into it …” with the hanging ellipsis.)

8. “Looking forward to it!”

Can’t quite decide about this one because I am so rarely looking forward to anything that comes by email. Maybe someone else is. I will reserve judgment for now.

7. & 6. “So true!” and “I agree!”

Not as useful as they might have been a few years ago, when heartwarming Upworthy videos were more popular. Maybe they’ll come back into relevance around the election, when you start getting more of those lefty chain emails from your great-uncle in Vermont, the ones that end with the “Coexist” logo.

5. “Got it!”

Could be something to send after you get a sensitive document and you want to acknowledge it. “Got it — thanks,” sans exclamation point, with em-dash, would be vastly better. Either way, it’s the text equivalent of the return receipt. Allowable under some circumstances.

4. “I don’t think so.”

Every editor can use this. Also, if they sold it on a T-shirt, I’d buy it.

3. “It is!”

Situationally useful. “We’d said 1 p.m. — is this meeting still happening?” And it’s tonally appropriate there, too. Not bad.

2. “Thanks!”

The Dasani option in the gas-station soda machine. Everything else is terrible for you; this is fine.

1. “Why?”

The best idea Google has ever had. I will consider sending this reply to every message I ever receive, forever.. Google's big Gmail redesign, which will become the default for users next month, includes a feature called Smart Reply -- short responses at the bottom of an email that users can choose to send instead of writing their own reply. They've had mixed reviews so far, with some saying they're convenient and others saying they often lack an appropriate tone. But the Wall Street Journal reports that Gmail users will be able to opt out of Smart Reply on the desktop version of Gmail in the coming weeks.

Around 10 percent of Gmail responses are now generated with the Smart Reply feature, according to the Wall Street Journal, and it has been available on Gmail apps since last year. Ajit Varma, Google's director of product management, told the publication that the phrases offered in the email are drawn from a library that a Google bot compiled based on billions of analyzed Gmail messages. Early versions of Smart Reply included responses like "Sent from my iPhone" and "I love you" since those are used frequently in Gmail replies. Those were removed as reply options, Varma said. Over time users should find that their suggested replies become more personalized.

You can already turn off Smart Reply in your Gmail app. Just head to Settings and you'll find the Smart Reply feature under the General section. From there, you can toggle it on or off.. How do you feel about Gmail’s new Smart Reply tool? We’re hearing mixed reports. On one hand it’s super handy to be able to tap/click that “Thank you so much!” button when you’re in a rush.

However, users are reporting the suggestions aren’t always on the money. People are seeing “Sent from my iPhone” as a suggested reply, while others have spied “I love you” in the ‘smart’ replies field. Man, that could be an awkward way for your office crush to find out about it, huh?

Also, and perhaps more pertinently, the fact Google knows what a suitable response could include is creepy as hell. It’s an effective punch in the face from Google that says “we’re reading your emails”. We all know it happens, but come on…

Related: Best smartphone 2018

The inaccuracies and the stalker-ish elements have enough folks wanting out.

On mobile this is possible by accessing Settings and switching off the “Smart Reply” toggle switch. However, on desktop, where the Smart Reply feature is arguably less necessary, the option is notably absent.

Thankfully, for creeped-out Gmail users, the switch-off switch will be here in the coming weeks (per Wall Street Journal). There’s no specific date for the rollout, but we’ll keep you posted.

The introduction of Smart Reply came along with Google’s much larger redesign of Google, which was rolled out to its user base of 1.4 billion earlier this summer.

That also included the addition of Smart Compose tool, which aims to predict what you’re going to write. If you agree with a suggestion from Google, hitting the tab button auto-fills the text.

This is another example of Google’s machine learning tools in action and of the user base happy to put convenience over the potential privacy costs of enabling Google to read our personal correspondences.

Are you happy with Google’s Smart Reply feature? Let us know @TrustedReviews on Twitter. I love you.. . Google will soon scan the content of your emails and serve up what it thinks is the perfect reply.

The new feature, called Smart Reply, identifies Gmail emails that require a response and presents three options for replies. Smart Reply will roll out this week to people using Google's Inbox for Gmail app.

For example, if you get the email, "Do you have any documentation for how to use the new software?" the Inbox for Gmail app will show these three responses at the bottom of your screen:

"I don't, sorry."

"I will have to look for it."

"I'll send it to you."

Smart, right?

In another example, you might get an email that says, "Do you have your vacation plans set yet? When you do, can you send them along?"

Google (GOOGL) will give you three replies:

"No plans yet."

"I just sent them to you."

"I'm working on them."

If you decide to choose a Google-provided response, you can add to it or edit the reply after tapping on one of the three options.

Smartphone software makers have been trying to figure out how to save keystrokes for years. Autocorrect, swipe gestures and even emojis are helpful sometimes, but they still require a bunch of taps or swipes to type what you want to say. Quick responses have existed for years, but they're canned messages and don't change based on the content of the text or email that you received.

"For those emails that only need a quick response, it can take care of the thinking and save precious time spent typing," said Bálint Miklós, software engineer for the Gmail team, in a blog post. "And for those emails that require a bit more thought, it gives you a jump start so you can respond right away."

Miklós said that getting computers to understand how to do that was a difficult task. It takes a great deal of heavy-duty machine learning to pull it off, and it might take some time to perfect it. The responses that Gmail customers choose (or don't choose) will help the Inbox app improve its suggestions in the future, he noted.

"For example, when Smart Reply was tested at Google, a common suggestion in the workplace was 'I love you.' Miklós said. "Thanks to Googler feedback, Smart Reply is now SFW :)". Ever wished your phone could automatically reply to your email messages?

Well, Google just unveiled technology that's at least moving in that direction. Using what's called "deep learning"—a form of artificial intelligence that's rapidly reinventing a wide range of online services—the company is beefing up its Inbox by Gmail app so that it can analyze the contents of an email and then suggest a few (very brief) responses. The idea is that you can rapidly respond to someone while on the go—without having to manually tap a fresh message into your smartphone keyboard.

"The network will tailor both the tone and content of the responses to the email you're reading," says Google product management director Alex Gawley. It gives you three of these responses, and you can then choose the one that best suits what you want to say.

Dubbed Smart Reply, the system learns to generate appropriate replies by analyzing scads of email conversations from across Google's Gmail service, the world's most popular internet-based email system. A deep learning service feeds information into what's called a neural network—a vast network of machines that approximates the web of neurons in the human brain—and this neural network analyzes the information in order to "learn" a particular task. By analyzing thousands of cat photos, for instance, a neural net can learn to identify a cat. By analyzing a database of spoken words, it can learn to recognize the commands you speak into your smartphone. In this case, the system learns to compose email replies by analyzing real-world email conversations.

Google

Experts on deep learning, however, will tell you that such systems have their limitations. "With finite amounts of data, you can create a rudimentary understanding of the world," says Andrew Ng, chief scientist at Baidu, the Chinese Internet giant that also sits at the forefront of the deep learning movement, "but humans learn about the world in all sorts of ways [we can't yet duplicate]." Indeed, Gawley acknowledges that Google's Smart Reply system doesn't always get things right. But that's part of the reason the company provides three potential replies to each email—not just one. Plus, it lets you edit these replies and augment them with your own words.

The system uses what's called a "long short-term-memory," or LSTM, neural network. Essentially, this is a neural net that exhibits something akin to human memory. It can "remember" the beginning of an email as it's parsing the end—and that helps it, on some level, understand this natural language. In a research paper published earlier this year, a team of Google researchers showed how this technology could be used to build a "chatbot" that can carry on a decent conversation (in certain situations).

Actually, the Smart Reply system uses two neural networks. After the first one analyzes the email at hand—distilling what is being said—a second takes this information and works to generate the potential responses. This network builds these replies one word at a time, much as you would.

With Smart Reply, Google is rightly keeping the scope of the application as small as possible. The replies it generates are between three and six words long. But Gawley says that within this small scope, the system proves surprisingly nuanced. In some cases, for instance, it can tell when an email includes a joke and suggest the reply "Ha. Very funny." If someone asks "Do you have your vacation plans set yet? When you do, can you send them along?," the potential replies might be: "No plans yet," "I just sent them to you," and "I'm workin