Not all doctors or CEOs are men. Not all nurses are women. But you might think otherwise if you searched for these professions in Google images.

It turns out that there's a noticeable gender bias in the image search results for some jobs, according to a new study by researchers at the University of Washington and the University of Maryland. This underrepresentation of women in image search results actually affects people's ideas about professional gender ratios in the real world, the study found.

See for yourself...

This is what happened when I searched "nurse" in Google images:

This is what happened when I searched "doctor" in Google images:

This is what happened when I searched "CEO" in Google images:

That's all white men in that last one, in case you couldn't tell.

Though they're in the minority, there are some chief executives who are women and who are not white.

Advertisement

Researchers looked at the top 100 image search results for 45 different jobs. They then compared the gender breakdown of those results to actual gender data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for each job.

It turns out that for some search terms, like "chief executive officer," the gender imbalance on Google is a lot worse than it is in real life. The study found that only 11 percent of the people shown in an image search for "chief executive officer" were women, while BLS data indicates that 27 percent of CEOs are women. Similarly, a search for telemarketers showed 64 percent women, even though in reality it's about a 50-50 gender split. Nearly 60 percent of bartenders are female, but in the image search results, only 23 percent were.

Not all jobs demonstrated such a gulf between search results and reality. But women were slightly underrepresented on average across all jobs the researchers looked at.

“I was actually surprised at how good the image search results were, just in terms of numbers,” said Matt Kay, a co-author of the study. “They might slightly underrepresent women and they might slightly exaggerate gender stereotypes, but it’s not going to be totally divorced from reality.”

Advertisement

And try searching a term like "female construction worker." (According to BLS data, 2.9 percent of construction workers are women.)

“A number of the top hits depicting women as construction workers are models in skimpy little costumes with a hard hat posing suggestively on a jackhammer,” said Cynthia Matuszek, a co-author of the study. "You get things that nobody would take as professional."



Google image search, like Google's many other search tools, mines the Web for content based on algorithms that are designed to show you the results it thinks you'd most want to see. Google's searches take into account a number of factors, like keywords, timeliness of the content, where you're searching from and PageRank, which is Google's way of analyzing how important a page on the Internet is. Google declined to comment about the study's findings.

The sad thing is, the gender biases displayed in search actually do have an effect on how people perceive gender breakdowns in the real world, according to the study. After being shown skewed image results for a certain occupation, study participants did report a slight change in their perceptions of how male-dominated a field was.

Of course, none of this is exactly Google's fault. Google is a reflection of what's on the Internet. You can also see similar search results on Yahoo and Bing.

But the researchers suggested that search engine designers could actually use these study results to develop algorithms that would help work against gender stereotypes.

Advertisement

“Our hope is that this will become a question that designers of search engines might actually ask,” said Sean Munson, another co-author of the study. “They may come to a range of conclusions, but I would feel better if people are at least aware of the consequences and are making conscious choices around them.”

. The University of Washington just released a preview of a study that claims search engine results can influence people's perceptions about how many men or women hold certain jobs. One figure quoted in the preview is that in a Google image search for CEO, only 11 percent of the people returned were women (by comparison, the university says 27 percent of CEOs in the US are women). That's pretty crazy, so I decided to fire up incognito mode in Chrome and search Google Images as an Anonymous Internet Person to see the authentic, natural results. And, uh, the results are insane. I haven't seen this many white men in suits since the last time I was in church.

Here's a look, zoomed way out to 50 percent:

No women to be found. Oh, wait. See that thumbnail in the bottom row to the right?

CEO Barbie. This is the first woman who appears in a Google Image search for "CEO," rows and rows and rows below the top results — and she's not even a real Barbie doll! This image is actually from a 2005 Onion article which sarcastically observed that "women don't run companies," they just "work behind the scenes to bring a man's vision to light." This may be the most meta Onion joke of all time.

Stuff gets even crazier if you broaden the search terms.

Oh hey this CEO image search thing gets even better @chillmage pic.twitter.com/RxiHGeENPB — Eileen Ridge (@notbangalore) April 9, 2015

Search for "male CEO" or "man CEO" and you just get pictures of dudes who run companies. Search for "woman CEO" or "female CEO" and you get a whole bunch of wacky, gendered suggested search categories, including:

Outfit

Attire

Glasses

Successful Business Woman Profile

Business Woman Silhouette

Google's search engine intelligence may be mostly artificial, but it's bootstrapped by the garbage expectations that many of its users feed into the system over time. Getting rid of nasty occupational stereotypes will require better human intelligence.. Who’s a CEO? Google image results can shift gender biases

Jennifer Langston UW News

Getty Images last year created a new online image catalog of women in the workplace – one that countered visual stereotypes on the Internet of moms as frazzled caregivers rather than powerful CEOs.

A new University of Washington study adds to those efforts by assessing how accurately gender representations in online image search results for 45 different occupations match reality.

In a few jobs — including CEO — women were significantly underrepresented in Google image search results, the study found, and that can change searchers’ worldviews. Across all the professions, women were slightly underrepresented on average.

The study also answers a key question: Does the gender ratio in images that pop up when we type “author,” “receptionist” or “chef” influence people’s perceptions about how many men or women actually hold those jobs?

Read about another of Munson’s CHI 2015 papers on making public exercise commitments on Facebook

In a paper to be presented in April at the Association for Computing Machinery’s CHI 2015 conference in South Korea, researchers from the UW and the University of Maryland, Baltimore County found that manipulated image search results could determine, on average, 7 percent of a study participant’s subsequent opinion about how many men and women work in a particular field, compared with earlier estimates.

“You need to know whether gender stereotyping in search image results actually shifts people’s perceptions before you can say whether this is a problem. And, in fact, it does — at least in the short term,” said co-author Sean Munson, UW assistant professor of human centered design and engineering.

The study first compared the percentages of women who appeared in the top 100 Google image search results in July 2013 for different occupations — from bartender to chemist to welder — with 2012 U.S. Bureau of Labor statistics showing how many women actually worked in that field.

In some jobs, the discrepancies were pronounced, the study found. In a Google image search for CEO, 11 percent of the people depicted were women, compared with 27 percent of U.S. CEOs who are women. Twenty-five percent of people depicted in image search results for authors are women, compared with 56 percent of actual U.S. authors.

By contrast, 64 percent of the telemarketers depicted in image search results were female, while that occupation is evenly split between men and women.

Yet for nearly half of the professions – such as nurse practitioner (86 percent women), engineer (13 percent women), and pharmacist (54 percent women) — those two numbers were within five percentage points.

“I was actually surprised at how good the image search results were, just in terms of numbers,” said co-author Matt Kay, a UW doctoral student in computer science and engineering. “They might slightly underrepresent women and they might slightly exaggerate gender stereotypes, but it’s not going to be totally divorced from reality.”

When the researchers asked people to rate the professionalism of the people depicted in top image search results, though, other inequities emerged. Images that showed a person matching the majority gender for a profession tended to be ranked by study participants as more competent, professional and trustworthy. They were also more likely to choose them to illustrate that profession in a hypothetical business presentation.

By contrast, the image search results depicting a person whose gender didn’t match an occupational stereotype were more likely to be rated as provocative or inappropriate.

“A number of the top hits depicting women as construction workers are models in skimpy little costumes with a hard hat posing suggestively on a jackhammer. You get things that nobody would take as professional,” said co-author Cynthia Matuszek, a former UW doctoral student who is now an assistant professor of computer science and electrical engineering at University of Maryland, Baltimore County.

Most importantly, researchers wanted to explore whether gender biases in image search results actually affected how people perceived those occupations.

They asked study volunteers a series of questions about a particular job, including how many men and women worked in that field. Two weeks later, they showed them a set of manipulated image search results and asked the same questions.

Exposure to the skewed image search results did shift their estimates slightly, accounting for 7 percent of those second opinions. The study did not test long-term changes in perception, but other research suggests that many small exposures to biased information over time can have a lasting effect on everything from personal preconceptions to hiring practices.

The measured effect raises interesting questions, the researchers say, about whether search image algorithms should be changed to help counter occupational stereotypes.

“Our hope is that this will become a question that designers of search engines might actually ask,” Munson said. “They may come to a range of conclusions, but I would feel better if people are at least aware of the consequences and are making conscious choices around them.”

For more information, contact Munson, Kay and Matuszek at careerimagesearch@uw.edu.

Source note: Images are from Google searches conducted in April 2015. Cited percentages of women depicted in top 100 search results are from Google searches conducted in July 2013, and percentages of women actually working in a profession come from 2012 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.. . The Ellen Pao-Kleiner Perkins trial shone a light on discrimination in the tech industry, but for a more immediate look at the challenges women face in corporate America, look no further than a Google Images search.

Doing a search at the site for “CEO” reveals just one female face in the top results: CEO Barbie. The doll (which may not even be a real Barbie product) appears way down in the results, under a sea of male, mostly white faces.

It’s not really the fault of Google, whose algorithms in many ways reflect the pervasive culture: Most of the top images labeled CEO at popular sites apparently are men. But it’s an indication of how under-represented woman are at the top of the corporate ladder.

Nor is Google alone in its results, noticed earlier by The Verge. Search for “CEO” on Bing and the service offers to refine your search to “women CEO”—using the same picture of Barbie. Much lower down, Bing shows an image of former Burberry CEO Angela Ahrendts.

The results offer a glimpse into a male-dominated corporate culture, but they are also skewed against women. For the aforementioned Google search, 11 percent of the faces depicted in the top 100 results are women, but 27 percent of U.S. CEOs are female, according to researchers at the University of Washington, who published results of a study on the issue Thursday.

It works the other way, too. Do a Google Images search for “telemarketer,” and women dominate the top results, even though that occupation is split evenly between men and women, the researchers said.

The search results aren’t inconsequential, according to the study: They influence how people view the real world.

“In a few jobs—including CEO—women were significantly underrepresented in Google image search results … and that can change searchers’ worldviews,” the researchers said.. The report's authors, Matthew Kay and Sean A Munson from the University of Washington and Cynthia Matusek from the University of Maryland Baltimore County, say that the minority gender for any given occupation, whether that is a man or a woman, are usually portrayed "less professionally" than the majority gender for that role.. Try this: Google image "CEO." Notice anything? The first female Google image search result for "CEO" appears TWELVE rows down—and it's Barbie.

A recent study conducted at the University of Washington sought to examine how well female representation in online search results reflected reality—and, subsequently, how impressions in search results could, in turn, impact the way that people perceive how women are represented in industry, in real life.

"You need to know whether gender stereotyping in search image results actually shifts people's perceptions before you can say whether this is a problem," UW assistant professor of human-centered design and engineering says. "And, in fact, it does—at least in the short term."

How skewed—and how much does it skew perceptions, then, that the first female image result in Google for "CEO" is Barbie, appearing 12 rows (and two page scrolls) down?

The study first compared the percentages of women who appeared in the top 100 Google image search results in July 2013 for different occupations—from bartender to chemist to welder—with 2012 U.S. Bureau of Labor statistics showing how many women actually worked in 