Frequently Asked Questions

1. Isn't the arrest rate of blacks higher anyway?

The ads appear regardless of whether the company sponsoring the ad has a criminal record for the name. The appearance of the ads are not related to any arrest statistics or the like.



2. What is racism?

From the paper: "Racial discrimination results when a person or group of people is treated differently based on their racial origins [5]. Power is a necessary precondition, for it depends on the ability to give or withhold benefits, facilities, services, opportunities etc., from someone who should be entitled to them, and are denied on the basis of race. Institutional or structural racism is a system of procedures/patterns whose effect is to foster discriminatory outcomes or give preferences to members of one group over another [6]."

Notice that racism can result, even if not intentional.

The EEOC provides a test in cases of employment for a charge of discrimination. To make a determination, the EEOC uses an "adverse impact test," which measures whether practices, intentional or not, have a disproportionate effect. If the ratio of the effect on groups is less than 80 percent, the employer may be held responsible for discrimination. These ads are not necessarily used for employment, and the computation here is for reference; the appearance of the ads at both websites was 77 percent and 40 percent, both showing adverse impact.



3. Who is to blame?

The current study documents and observes that there is discrimination in the delivery of the ads. We do not yet know why the discriminatory effect occurs. We have some work underway to help us better understand what may be happening. Did the company provide ads suggestive of arrest disproportionately to black-identifying names? Or, did the company provide roughly the same ads evenly across racially associated names but society clicked ads suggestive of arrest more often for black identifying names? Google uses cloud-caching strategies to deliver ads quickly, might these strategies bias ad delivery towards ads previously loaded in the cloud cache? Is there a combinatorial effect?



4. What is a black-sounding name?

The study uses first names to predict race. First names that have the highest ratio of frequency in one racial group to frequency in the other racial group can be racially identifying. The first names used in the study came from earlier research which computed comparative frequencies from birth records. The study compared the online images of people having these first names to the race predicted and found these first names predictive of race (88 percent black, 96 percent white). The paper provides a complete breakdown by first name.

As examples, people having the first names DeShawn, Darnell and Jermaine, generated ads suggestive of an arrest in 81 to 86 percent of name searches on one website and 92 to 95 percent on the other, while those assigned at birth primarily to whites, such as Geoffrey, Jill and Emma, generated more neutral copy: the word "arrest" appeared in 23 to 29 percent of name searches on one site and 0 to 60 percent on the other. A few names did not follow these patterns: Dustin, a name predominantly given to white babies, generated an ad suggestive of arrest 81 and 100 percent of the time. The paper provides a complete breakdown by first name.



5. How can I see these ads?

Samples appear in the paper, which you can download here. Samples are also available in a slideshow at foreverdata.org.

The best way to view ad delivery right now, or to search what ads appear with your own name, is to go to a site that serves "Ads by Google". Ads appear much more often on these other sites than on google.com, a finding and rate reported in the paper. As of March 25, 2013, the ads no longer appear on Reuters.com, but they continue to appear at other sites hosting Ads by Google. Try entering a name in the search bar at chicagotribube.com.

Ads are based on the first and last names of real people. Ads suggestive of arrest may appear even if there is no criminal record for the person in the company's database.

Arrest ads continue to appear, based on a random check on March 26, 2013. Try entering a name in the search bar at chicagotribube.com.



6. What is the harm?

Whenever someone queries your name in a search engine, one of these ads appear. Perhaps you are in competition for an award, an appointment, a promotion, or a new job, or maybe you are in a position of trust, such as a professor, a physician, a banker, a judge, a manager, or a volunteer, or perhaps you are completing a rental application, selling goods, applying for a loan, joining a social club, making new friends, dating, or engaged in any one of hundreds circumstances for which an online searcher seeks to learn more about you. Appearing alongside your list of accomplishments is an advertisement implying you may have a criminal record, whether you actually have one or not. Worse, the ads don't appear for your competitors.



7. Why did you do this work?

One day a colleague of mine entered my office and needed to locate one of my old papers. He entered my name into a search engine, and up popped an ad "Latanya Sweeney. Arrested?". I was shocked. I have never been arrested, and after clicking the link and paying the requisite fee, I found the company had no arrest record for anyone with my name either. We then entered his name, Adam Tanner, a white male name, and an ad for the same company appeared, except the ad for him had no mention of arrest or a criminal record; it just said the company had background information about him. So, we searched more and more names for hours, until eventually my colleague jumped to the conclusion that ads suggestive of arrest were appearing more often for black-sounding names than white names. I did not believe him, but nothing I tried refuted his guess. Eventually, I said I have to look at this scientifically. So, I started at the beginning. Step one: what is a black sounding name? And I proceeded through the steps described in the paper, all the time believing the pattern would be present, until there was no mistaking it. There was statistically significant discrimination in ad delivery based on searches of 2184 racially associated personal names across two websites. On the more ad trafficked website, a black-identifying name was 25 percent more likely to get an ad suggestive of an arrest record. There was less than 0.1 percent probability that these data can be explained by chance.



8. Where can I learn more about your work?

More papers will appear on this topic as the work unfolds. Adam Tanner and Latanya Sweeney are writing a book about this and other personal data experiments. You can check out the latest with Latanya Sweeney on her website, latanyasweeney.org or follow @LatanyaSweeney on twitter.



. Google accused of racism after black names are 25% more likely to bring up adverts for criminal records checks

Professor finds 'significant discrimination' in ad results, with black names 25 per cent more likely to be linked to arrest record check services



She compared typically black names like 'Ebony' and 'DeShawn' with typically white ones like 'Jill' and 'Geoffrey'

Google has been accused of racism after allegedly linking names usually associated with black people to adverts related to criminality.

A Harvard University professor found 'significant discrimination' after comparing the adverts which appear when searching a typically black name compared with those for typically white names.

Findings showed that names typically associated with black people were 25 per cent more likely to bring up adverts related to criminality.

Racist? A new study claims that adverts linked to Google search results for typically black American names are more likely to be suggestive of criminality - like services offering to check arrest and criminal records

The study by Latanya Sweeney contrasted online searches using names such as 'Ebony' and 'DeShawn,' with those such as 'Jill' and 'Geoffrey.'

She found that adverts posted alongside search results for names likely to belong to black people were more likely to offer services like background checks for arrests and criminal records.

Searches using white-sounding names were less likely to result in advert results which suggested criminality, Professor Sweeney's research indicated.

The findings are significant since Google searching the names of potential employees, clients or even friends and dates has become commonplace.

'Advantages of knowing such information when hiring or engaging with a person relate to trustworthiness,' Professor Sweeney writes in a paper published online in the journal arXiv .

Consequences: The findings are significant since Google searching the names of potential employees, clients or even friends and dates has become commonplace (file photo) Professor Sweeney gathered evidence by collecting more than 2,000 names which were suggestive of race.

She then entered these names plus surnames into Google and news agency Reuters' Google-powered search engine and looked at which adverts the search results returned.

While most names brought back adverts for public records, typically black names were much more likely to bring back those that included the word 'arrest'.

All the results came from background-checking service instantcheckmate.com. In one particular case highlighted by Professor Sweeney, a search for the black-sounding names Latanya Farrell, Latanya Sweeney and Latanya Lockett all brought up adverts for arrest checking services.

However, subsequent investigation showed only one of the names, Latanya Lockett, had an arrest record linked to it. Sample ad and criminal reports for 'latanya farrell' (a,b), 'latanya sweeney' (c,d), and 'latanya locket' (e,f)appearing on google.com and reuters.com Typically white names: Sample ads and criminal reports for 'kristen haring' (a), 'kristen sparrow' (b), and 'kristen lindquist' (c). Criminal reports from instantcheckmate.com (b,d,f)

COULD BRAIN SCANS BE USED TO PICK OUT RACISTS?

Brain scans could soon be used to detect whether or not people are racist, scientists say.

Researchers found that brain scans were able to pick up on differences in the way that people with implicit negative racial attitudes viewed black and white faces.

Racial stereotypes have previously been shown to have subtle and unintended consequences on how we treat members of different race groups.

But the new research published in Psychological Science, a journal of the Association for Psychological Science, shows race biases also increase differences in the brain's representations of faces.

Psychologists from the University of Geneva in Switzerland and New York University examined activity in the brain while participants looked at pictures of White and black faces.

Afterwards, participants performed a task that assessed their unconscious or implicit expression of race attitudes.

By examining patterns of brain activity in the fusiform face area — which is involved in face perception — researchers were able to predict the race of the person the participant was viewing, but only for those with strong, negative implicit race attitudes.

This, the researchers said, implies that people with stronger, negative implicit race attitudes may actually perceive black and white faces to look more different than others who held no such prejudice.

'In comparison, searches for “Kristen Haring”, “Kristen Sparrow” and “Kristen Lindquist” did not yield any instantcheckmate.com ads, only competitor ads, even though the company’s database reports having records for all

three names and arrest records for “Kristen Sparrow” and “Kristen Lindquist",' Professor Sweeney wrote.



She added: 'Together, these hand-picked examples describe the suspected pattern – ads suggesting arrest tend to appear with names associated with blacks and neutral ads or no ads tend to appear with names associated with whites, regardless of whether the company has an arrest record associated with the name.'

In the UK, black people are 3.3 times more likely than white people to be arrested for a crime and those from the mixed ethnic group 2.3 times more likely.

The findings raise 'questions as to whether Google's advertising technology exposes racial bias in society and how ad and search technology can develop to assure racial fairness,' Professor Sweeney said in a blog post.

Advertisers bid on terms, or key words, with high bidders getting their ads posted alongside corresponding search results.



Google defends the process as race-neutral, saying outcomes are driven by decisions by advertisers.



A spokesman said: 'AdWords does not conduct any racial profiling.



'We also have an “anti” and violence policy which states that we will not allow ads that advocate against an organisation, person or group of people.



'It is up to individual advertisers to decide which keywords they want to choose to trigger their ads.'

Instant Checkmate contacted MailOnline in response the the issues raised in the study. A spokesman said: 'As a point of fact, Instant Checkmate would like to state unequivocally that it has never engaged in racial profiling in Google AdWords.



'We have absolutely no technology in place to even connect a name with a race and have never made any attempt to do so.



'The very idea is contrary to our company's most deeply held principles and values.'

. . How Much Does Your Name Matter?

Season 4, Episode 2

When Harvard professor Latanya Sweeney Googled her name one day, she noticed something strange: an ad for a background check website came up in the results, with the heading: “Latanya Sweeney, Arrested?” But she had never been arrested, and neither had the only other Latanya Sweeney in the U.S. So why did the ad suggest so? Thousands of Google searches later, Sweeney discovered that Googling traditionally black names is more likely to produce an ad suggestive of a criminal background. Why? In this episode of Freakonomics Radio, Stephen Dubner investigates the latest research on names. Steve Levitt talks about his groundbreaking research on names, economic status, and race. And University of Chicago economist Eric Oliver explains why a baby named “Cody” is more likely to belong to conservative parents, and why another named “Esme” was probably born to a pair of liberals.. UPDATED: February 20, 2013, at 10:35 a.m.

A Harvard researcher has found that typically African-American names are more likely to be linked to a criminal record in Google-generated advertisements on the online search engine and on the news site Reuters.com, a website to which Google supplies advertisements.

Latanya Sweeney, director of the Data Privacy Lab at Harvard, began her research after a colleague, government department fellow Adam Tanner, told her that his Google search of her name had generated an advertisement that read: “Latanya Sweeney: arrested.”

In disbelief, Sweeney began poking around online and found that advertisements from criminal records site InstantCheckmate.com incorrectly suggested that she had an arrest history. The two then plugged Tanner’s name into Google and, to the pair’s surprise, it generated a neutral InstantCheckmate ad that did not hint at a criminal record.

“Adam jumped to the conclusion that [the advertisements] were coming up on Black-sounding names,” said Sweeney. “I spent hours trying to show him that he was wrong and couldn’t.”

Thus began the start of a research study, which was partially funded by Google, that involved extensive combing of the Internet and numerous databases. Sweeney’s research paper summarizing her findings is slated for publication in an academic journal.

First, Sweeney identified typically African-American names using a database that compiled first names given disproportionately to babies of one racial identity over another. She then paired the first names with last names by identifying real professionals with academic qualifications—medical doctors, for example—and verified their racial identities with Google Image search results. Finally, using a sample of typically Caucasian and typically African American names, she ran analysis on search results.

According to Sweeney, Google maintains that it cannot predict which advertisements—positive or negative—will be most popular, so advertisements are initially distributed at random. However, in searches of typically African-American names on Google and Reuters.com, Sweeney found between 81 to 95 percent of generated ads suggested an arrest.

“It is an interesting mirror of society,” said Sweeney, “that the Internet, which started out neutral, has begun to show racial bias.”

When asked for comment, Google spokesperson Aaron J. Stein wrote in an email that AdWords, Google's profitable advertising product, does not engage in racial profiling.

Advertisement

“We also have a policy which states that we will not allow ads that advocate against an organization, person or group of people,” Stein wrote. “It is up to individual advertisers to decide which keywords they want to choose to trigger their ads.”

Reuters.com could not immediately be reached for comment on Sweeney’s study Wednesday evening.

Sweeney said there are two possible reasons for the seemingly biased results: Google’s computer-generated algorithm may be unintentionally skewed, or Google users may choose to more frequently click on arrest advertisements that come up for black names over white names.

Gary King, director of the Institute for Qualitative Social Science at Harvard, wrote in an email that isolating the cause of the skewed search results will determine the next steps for researchers.

“Laying out the patterns, as Latanya is doing, and then ascertaining its causes and effects, is very important,” King wrote.

—Staff writer Anneli L. Tostar can be reached at annelitostar@college.harvard.edu, Follow her on Twitter at @annelitostar.. . Latanya Sweeney, Racial Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery

Comment by: Margaret Hu

PLSC 2013

Published version available here: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2208240

Workshop draft abstract:

Investigating the appearance of online advertisements that imply the existence of an arrest record, this writing chronicles field experiments that measure racial discrimination in ads served by Google AdSense. A specific company, instantcheckmate.com, sells aggregated public information about individuals in the United States and sponsors ads to appear with Google search results for searches of some exact “firstname lastname” queries. A Google search for a person’s name, such as “Trevon Jones”, may yield a personalized ad that may be neutral, such as “Looking for Trevon Jones? Comprehensive Background Report and More…”, or may be suggestive of an arrest record (Suggestive ad), such as “Trevon Jones, Arrested?…” or “Trevon Jones: Truth. Arrests and much more. … “

Field experiments documented in this writing show racial discrimination in ad delivery based on searches of 2200 personal names across two websites. First names, documented by others as being assigned primarily to black babies, such as Tyrone, Darnell, Ebony and Latisha, generated ads suggestive of an arrest 75 percent and 96 percent of the time, and names having a first name documented by others as being assigned at birth primarily to whites, such as Geoffrey, Brett, Kristen and Anne, generated more neutral copy: the word “arrest” appeared zero to 9 percent of the time. A few names did not follow these patterns: Brad, a name predominantly given to white babies, generated a Suggestive ad 62 percent to 65 percent of the time. All ads return results for actual individuals and Suggestive ads appear regardless of whether the subjects have an arrest record in the company’s database. Notwithstanding these findings, the company maintains Google received the same ad copy for groups of last names (not first names), raising questions as to whether Google’s algorithm exposes racial bias in society.. Is Google biasing the ads it serves up based on whether a name sounds "black"?

That's the conclusion of a paper by Harvard professor Latanya Sweeney, who wrote in her paper that searches on names that may be identified as black brought up ads for criminal background searches.

"Have you ever been arrested? Imagine the question not appearing in the solitude of your thoughts as you read this paper, but appearing explicitly whenever someone queries your name in a search engine," Sweeney wrote in the beginning of her paper, " Discrimination in online activity."

As reported in MIT Technology Review, Sweeney's search on her own name in Google prompted her to think more about how the search engine giant's ad delivery:

When she entered her name in Google an ad appeared with the wording: â€œLatanya Sweeney, Arrested? 1) Enter name and state 2) Access full background. Checks instantly. www.instantcheckmate.comâ€�

Sweeney did searches for more than 2,000 names that were suggestive of race -- for example, "DeShawn, Darnelle, and Jermaine" for "black" names and "Geoffrey, Jill, and Emma" for "white" names.

Searches on the black identifying names served up ads with the word "arrest" 60 percent of the time, compared with 48 percent of the time for white identifying names, Sweeney found.

What do you make of Sweeney's research? Do you agree that Google is using race to determine which ads accompany searches on names?



. . When Timnit Gebru attended a prestigious AI research conference last year, she counted 6 black people in the audience out of an estimated 8,500. And only one black woman: herself.

As a PhD candidate at Stanford University who has published a number of notable papers in the field of artificial intelligence, Gebru finds the lack of diversity in the industry to be “extremely alarming” and effectively an “international emergency.” “People openly acknowledge that diversity is a priority,” she explains, “but they don’t treat the issue as urgent and actively address it.”

Gebru is hardly a stranger to adversity. Originally from Ethiopia, she arrived in the United States at the age of 16 and was immediately confronted with racial prejudices. Teachers expected her to fail exams because she was a foreigner. A guidance counselor nearly convinced her she couldn’t win acceptance to any universities, even her safety school. Through perseverance and resilience, Gebru debunked these inaccurate predictions and thrived in her new country, landing employment as an engineer for Apple and advanced technical degrees from Stanford.

AI researchers pride themselves on being rational and data-driven, but can be blind to issues such as racial or gender bias that aren’t always easy to capture with numbers. Homogenous thinking in the AI industry has implications far beyond the racial makeup of PhD programs and AI conference attendees. Gebru points out that AI powers high-stakes systems used to identify terrorists or predict criminal recidivism. Biases and oversights even bleed into the everyday technology we rely on.

These ongoing challenges are no surprise to Latanya Sweeney, the first black woman to receive a PhD in computer science from MIT. Currently a professor at Harvard and director of their Data Privacy Lab, Sweeney’s research examines technological solutions to societal, political and governance challenges. One of her important contributions illuminates discrimination in online advertising, where she discovered internet searches of names “racially associated” with the black community are 25% more likely to yield sponsored ads suggesting that the person has a criminal record, regardless of the truth. When Sweeney googles her own name, she encounters ads such as: “Latanya Sweeney, Arrested? 1) Enter name and state 2) Access full background. Checks instantly. www.instantcheckmate.com.”

Recently, Sweeney, who is also Editor-In-Chief of Technology Science, reported that SAT test prep services charge zip codes with high proportions of Asian residents nearly double the average price, regardless of their actual income. “In the United States, price discrimination is illegal if based on race, religion, nationality, or gender,” her report states, but the enforcement of the law is challenging in online commerce where differential pricing is wrapped up in opaque algorithms.

Biases of creators trickle down to their creations. Due to the exponential impact of technology, prioritizing diversity in AI is “even more important than in other fields,” cautions Gebru. To encourage networking and visibility, Gebru co-founded the social community Black In AI. The organization is on track to dramatically increase the participation of black researchers at notable AI conferences. She also returned to Ethiopia to co-teach a programming course called AddisCoder to a diverse range of children. Half of the students were female and all were from public schools. Some of them didn’t even know how to type when they started the class.

Yet, the transformation was extraordinary. One of the students came from a family with financial hurdles that forced him to leave school, but successfully won admittance to Harvard, MIT, and Columbia after completing the AddisCoder program.

Despite inclusion programs and advocacy groups, many challenges to diversity remain. The first is the apolitical nature of the AI industry, which often prefers the ivory towers of academia. “Einstein was an activist and anti-segregationist,” Gebru remembers. “He taught at black schools and likened the racial discrimination in the US to what was happening in Nazi Germany. But most AI researchers today look down on politicians and don’t want to get involved.” As AI is increasingly used to affect outcomes of elections and identify terrorists and criminals, she cautions that “AI researchers should not be silent regarding the repercussions of their work.”

The current anti-immigration sentiment does not help either. Rana el Kaliouby, an Egyptian-Muslim entrepreneur, completed a PhD at Cambridge University and post-doc work at MIT. She commercialized her research in emotional artificial intelligence into the company Affectiva, which has raised over $30 million in funding. “I woke up to the news about [Trump’s] immigration [order] and had this empty feeling in my stomach,” she shares in a heartfelt story for Inc, adding that “this melting pot of experiences, interests, educations, backgrounds and cultures makes the U.S. truly amazing.” Restricting borders directly excludes some of the world’s top AI researchers, which in turn limits the collaboration and innovation in the industry.

Another issue lies in how we define “diversity.” Gebru points out that “when people talk about diversity in the tech industry, they’re often referring to including more women. But there are all types of women, such as women with disabilities, alternative sexualities, various races, and different socioeconomic backgrounds. If you only include women in the top 1%, that’s not helpful.” Ageism, classism, and many other prejudices hamper the professional growth of many qualified experts, yet don’t receive the attention that racism or sexism do.

Plenty more challenges exist to make diversity and inclusion an uphill battle in the field of AI, but the obstacles don’t discourage brilliant minds from actively tackling these important issues. However, advocacy cannot solely be the responsibility of the excluded. Fundamental and lasting change can only arrive when technology creators and the public at large awaken to the dangers of exclusion and make inclusion a true priority.. When Sweeney then clicked on those ads and paid the fee, it turned out, not surprisingly, that there was no record of her being arrested. By way of contrast, she did search for the names “Kristen Haring”, “Kristen Sparrow” and “Kristen Lindquist.” Ads came up, but not from Instantcheckmate or other similar services. But when she searched on those names in Instantcheckmate, there were arrest records for two of those women in the company database.

On Reuters.com, which uses Google AdSense to serve ads, a “black-identifying name was 25 percent more likely to get an ad suggestive of an arrest record,” Sweeney found. On Google, 92 percent of ads appearing next to black-identifying names suggested a criminal record, compared to 80 percent of white-identifying names, she wrote.

It’s not clear what’s at the bottom of this. Google, of course, denies that it engages in what you’d have to call racial profiling. It may be that Instant Checkmate, which had the most online ads of any company tracked in the study, chose to link black-identifying names with ad templates suggesting a criminal record, though the company told Sweeney that it doesn’t do that.

“There is discrimination in delivery of these ads,” Sweeney writes in her report. “Notice that racism can result, even if not intentional, and that online activity may be so ubiquitous and intimately entwined with technology design that technologists may now have to think about societal consequences like structural racism in the technology they design.”

I suspect that what may be going on here has to do with the type of searches millions of people make every day. Google’s algorithm does track searches and uses that information to make search more relevant. If enough people are searching on black-sounding names and terms like crime, that might explain this.

Ultimately, I bet we’ll never find out, but it’s worth thinking about the ways the Web affects all of us in some very unexpected ways.. Stories Can computers be racist? Big data, inequality, and discrimination Michael Brennan, Senior Program Officer, Technology and Society ©Alan Schein Photography/Corbis

It seems like everyone is talking about the power of big data and how it is helping companies, governments, and organizations make better and more efficient decisions. But rarely do they mention that big data can actually perpetuate and exacerbate existing systems of racism, discrimination, and inequality.

Big data is supposed to make life better. Companies like Netflix use it to recommend movies you might like to watch based on what you’ve previously streamed. There are also broader public applications, such as predicting (and thus more quickly responding to) outbreaks of disease based on online search patterns of symptoms.

The problem with big data is that its application and use is not impartial or unbiased. Harvard professor Latanya Sweeney, who also directs the university’s Data Privacy Lab, conducted a cross-country study of 120,000 Internet search ads and found repeated incidence of racial bias. Specifically, her study looked at Google adword buys made by companies that provide criminal background checks. At the time, the results of the study showed that when a search was performed on a name that was “racially associated” with the black community, the results were much more likely to be accompanied by an ad suggesting that the person had a criminal record—regardless of whether or not they did (see video below). This is just one of many research studies showing similar bias.

If an employer searched the name of a prospective hire, only to be confronted with ads suggesting that the person had a prior arrest, you can imagine how that could affect the applicant’s career prospects.

Information Accessibility Statement Accessibility Statement All videos produced by the Ford Foundation since 2020 include captions and downloadable transcripts. For videos where visuals require additional understanding, we offer audio-described versions.

We are continuing to make videos produced prior to 2020 accessible.

Videos from third-party sources (those not produced by the Ford Foundation) may not have captions, accessible transcripts, or audio descriptions.

To improve accessibility beyond our site, we’ve created a free video accessibility WordPress plug-in.

So while we’re lead to believe that data doesn’t lie—and therefore, that algorithms that analyze the data can’t be prejudiced—that isn’t always true. The origin of the prejudice is not necessarily embedded in the algorithm itself: Rather, it is in the models used to process massive amounts of available data and the adaptive nature of the algorithm. As an adaptive algorithm is used, it can learn societal biases it observes.

As Professor Alvaro Bedoya, executive director of the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown University, explains, “any algorithm worth its salt” will learn from the external process of bias or discriminatory behavior. To illustrate this, Professor Bedoya points to a hypothetical recruitment program that uses an algorithm written to help companies screen potential hires. If the hiring managers using the program only select younger applicants, the algorithm will learn to screen out older applicants the next time around:

Information Accessibility Statement Accessibility Statement All videos produced by the Ford Foundation since 2020 include captions and downloadable transcripts. For videos where visuals require additional understanding, we offer audio-described versions.

We are continuing to make videos produced prior to 2020 accessible.

Videos from third-party sources (those not produced by the Ford Foundation) may not have captions, accessible transcripts, or audio descriptions.

To improve accessibility beyond our site, we’ve created a free video accessibility WordPress plug-in.

As mathematician Cathy O’Neil said at the Personal Democracy Forum earlier this year, “many of these things are truly good intentions gone awry.” While algorithms and data have great potential to help move us toward a more just world, they are too often moving us in the opposite direction.

There is no easy fix. Instead, a broad coalition of civil society organizations must push for change in a number of directions at the same time. Sweeney and Bedoya outline a number of strategies, including:

Investing in the technical capacity of public interest lawyers, and developing a greater cohort of public interest technologists. With more engineers participating in policy debates and more policymakers who understand algorithms and big data, both government and civil society organizations will be stronger.

With more engineers participating in policy debates and more policymakers who understand algorithms and big data, both government and civil society organizations will be stronger. Pressing for “algorithmic transparency.” By ensuring that the algorithms underpinning critical systems like public education and criminal justice are open and transparent, we can better understand their biases and fight for change.

By ensuring that the algorithms underpinning critical systems like public education and criminal justice are open and transparent, we can better understand their biases and fight for change. Exploring effective regulation of personal data. Current laws and regulations are out dated and provide relatively little guidance on how our data is utilized in the technologies we rely on every day. We can do better.

We often hear the Internet spoken about as a “great equalizer.” But while it certainly has the potential to transform governance and connect communities, it can also perpetuate inequality. As Professor Bedoya argues, “Across the board, vulnerable communities, the unpopular, the weak, lose when powerful entities decide what is and isn’t okay about their data.” Understanding the biases inherent in data and digital spaces makes it possible for us to push back, and to shape an Internet that reflects our ideals.



This post is based on a series of presentations given at the Ford Foundation, led by Latanya Sweeney from the Data Privacy Lab at Harvard University and Alvaro Bedoya from the Center on Privacy and Technology at Georgetown University. The presentations in their entirety can be viewed below.

. . Google’s search algorithms expose racial discrimination, a new study by Harvard professor purports. It claims ads related to criminal records are more likely to pop up when "black-sounding names" are ‘googled’.

Latanya Sweeney, Professor of Government and Technology in Residence at Harvard, had found out that Google searches involving "black-sounding names" are more than 25 percent likely to produce ads that imply that person has been arrested than “white-sounding names”.



What are “black- and white-sounding names”?



In her paper “Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery” (published January 28) Sweeney refers to the a Job Discrimination study that “used a correlation of names given to black and white babies in Massachusetts between 1974 and 1979.”



First, using those findings, she collected a list of more than 2,000 names that were suggestive of race.



Names such as Lakisha, DeAndre, Jermaine, Leroy and Darnell more often tend to suggest that the person was black, while names like Allison, Kristen, Greg or Jack were considered to be white-identifying names.

Sweeney has taken a look at the so-called public record ads like InstantCheckMate or PeopleSmart and some others. She compared search results on Google.com and Reuters.com. It turned out that “black-sounding names” are more likely than “white-sounding” to trigger ads including the word "arrest". Searching for names like Leroy, Jamal or Kenya yielded a greater percentage of ads with the word “arrested” in the ad’s text, while for Jack or Greg, for instance, neutral ads, with no criminal related text, popped up. In Google search InstantCheckMate ads contained the word “arrested” in 92 per cent of returns (in 332 cases out of 366) when “black-sounding” names were looked for, 8 per cent of neutral ads popped up.For comparison, on Reuters search InstantCheckMate ads suggested checking criminal records in 60 per cent of all black identifying names. Sweeney tried her own name. A computer scientist with no criminal past, she discovered that prior to presenting her academic merits, she first of all was greeted by an ad that suggested checking if “Latanya Sweeney, arrested?”Sweeney followed the link and paid a fee to discover there was no criminal record associated with that name."Perhaps you are in competition for an award, an appointment, a promotion, or a new job…” the scientist writes in her paper, giving a bunch of circumstances for which an online researcher seeks to learn more about a person. “Appearing alongside your list of accomplishments is an advertisement implying you may have a criminal record whether you actually have one or not,” Sweeney concluded. However, she hesitated to give a cause for the differences in ads, saying more information “about the inner workings of Google AdSense [Google's online ad tool]” is required. Sweeney suggested that the search engines might be just a reflection of society’s prejudices and delivered ads are simply based on the most popular links previous users have clicked on. "So the ad text getting the most clicks eventually displays more frequently," she explained.Google AdSense has responded Sweeney’s findings saying that it does not conduct any racial profiling in its search software.. Ads more likely to link black-identifying names to criminal records, study says.

Feb. 6, 2013— -- A Google search for a "racially associated name" is more likely to trigger advertisements suggesting the person has a criminal background, according to a study by a Harvard professor.

Latanya Sweeney, a professor of government and technology at Harvard University and a specialist in online privacy, found that queries for a "black identifying" name were more likely to trigger an advertisement suggesting an arrest record than names traditionally given to white babies.

The study involved searches for 2,184 racially associated names as determined by prior workplace discrimination studies. Sweeney focused her analysis on Google.com and a highly trafficked news website that displays the widely used Google AdWords advertisements.

Names often given to black babies, such as DeShawn, Darnell and Jermaine, generated ads suggesting an arrest record in 81 to 86 percent of the searches on one website and 92 to 95 percent on the other, Sweeney wrote.

By comparison, names "predominantly given to white babies," such as Geoffrey, Jill and Emma, tended to trigger ads with more neutral copy, such as "Looking for Emma Jones?"

Of the searches involving the primarily white names, advertisements containing the word "arrest" appeared in 23 to 29 percent of the searches on one site and a range of 0 to 60 percent on the other, the study said.

Sweeney wrote that the statistical difference could have an impact on job seekers. However, she said more work would need to be done in order to determine whether it is Google's algorithm, advertisers, or an inherent bias in society that explains her findings.

"There is discrimination in delivery of these ads," Sweeney concluded, though she said the study also "raises more questions than it answers."

SLIDESHOW: Google Doodles

Google AdWords determine which advertisements appear, based on keywords, advertiser bids and user behavior.

In a statement, Google said, "AdWords does not conduct any racial profiling. We also have a policy which states that we will not allow ads that advocate against an organization, person or group of people. It is up to individual advertisers to decide which keywords they want to choose to trigger their ads.". Readers, I hate it to break it to you, but according to Harvard the internet is racist. I suggest you stop using it immediately unless you want your patronage of Google et al to blacken your name. Actually, err, maybe wait until you finish reading..

A recent study of Google searches by Professor Latanya Sweeney has found "significant discrimination" in ad results depending on whether the name you're Googling is, statistically speaking, more likely to belong to a white person or a black person. So while Googling an Emma will probably trigger nothing more sinister than an invitation to look up Emma's phone number and address, searching for a Jermaine could generate an ad for a criminal record search. In fact, Sweeney's research suggests that it's 25% more likely you'll get ads for criminal record searches from "black-identifying" names than white-sounding ones.

So what does this mean exactly? Does Google have some sort of racial profiling tool inlaid into its algorithms? Well, not exactly. Google has unequivocally stated that it "does not conduct any racial profiling" and the research paper itself admits that it's probably not as insidious as that. Rather it posits that the demographic discrepancies probably come from "smart" algorithms which adapt ad placement based on mass-user habits. In short, writes Sweeney, the results raise "questions as to whether Google's advertising technology exposes racial bias in society and how ad and search technology can develop to assure racial fairness".

Woah – did someone just claim that society is racially biased? Hold the front page. While the Harvard study makes some interesting points, the research is also a telling case of digital dualism – the idea that online and offline are separate and distinct realities. This may have been true decades ago when the internet was something you "dialled-up" in order to check AltaVista for deals on VCRs, but it is now woefully outdated. Most people now see the virtual world as simply a reflection of the real world. Indeed, a report published this year by the Government Office for Science proclaims that: "The UK is now a virtual environment as well as a real place."

The question of how (and, indeed, if) technology can rid itself of what Sweeney describes as "structural racism" has some interesting parallels to debates about language that have been taking place long before Google was a twinkle in Sergey Brin's eyes. Take, for example, the phrase I used earlier, "blacken your name". It's a fairly common idiom and you'd hardly call someone out for racism if they used it; nevertheless it is a laden term. Benjamin Zephaniah has a great poem called White Comedy, which addresses the politics of this sort of phraseology: "I waz whitemailed / By a white witch / Wid white magic / An white lies," the poem begins. You get the idea.

For centuries people have been attempting to rid language of its "structural racism" by inventing politically neutral dialects. Esperanto, created by the rather wonderfully named LL Zamenhof, has been the most successful of these efforts, designed to transcend nationality and foster peace, love, harmony, all that good stuff. It hasn't quite got there yet but it has managed to spawn tens of thousands of fluent speakers, as well around a thousand native speakers. It could be said that the technological equivalent of Esperanto is Value Sensitive Design (VSD), a belief that technology should be proactively influenced to take account of human values in the design process, rather than simply reacting to them after afterwards. While this seems like a good idea on the surface, it's a viper's nest of ethical questions when you dig deeper, throwing up a broader debate about the idea of universal values and cultural relativism.

But all this theory is, perhaps, a little highbrow and detracts from the most important point in Sweeney's research: your digital footprint has profound implications on your real life. As Descartes didn't quite say: "Googlito ergo sum" – I am on Google, therefore I am. And, if what you are on Google is a potential criminal, it is going to make your chances of getting a job somewhat harder. But getting rid of this bias isn't a matter of algorithms, it's a matter of changing attitudes. There is an interesting insight into this in the word "highbrow" itself: a term that comes from the 19th-century "science" of phrenology, which used the shapes of people's skulls to justify racism. In the 1820s-1840s, when phrenology was all the rage, employers often demanded a character reference from a local phrenologist to check whether you'd be a good employee or a potential criminal. Back in the day, then, your skull served as a sort of Google search. And we didn't progress as a society by changing our skulls, rather we changed what went into them.. Ads pegged to Google search results can be racially biased because of how certain names are associated with blacks or whites, according to a new study.

Advertisement

Harvard University professor Latanya Sweeney found "statistically significant discrimination" when comparing ads served with results from online searches made using names associated with blacks and those with whites.

The study contrasted online searches using names such as "Ebony" and "DeShawn," with those such as "Jill" and "Geoffrey."

Ads posted alongside search results for names likely to belong to blacks tended to suggest criminal activity with offers along the lines of background checks for arrests, according to the study.

Related stories

Searches using white-sounding names prompted results with neutral ads, the Sweeney's research indicated.

Advertisement

The findings raise "questions as to whether Google's advertising technology exposes racial bias in society and how ad and search technology can develop to assure racial fairness," Sweeney said in a blog post.

Advertisers bid on terms, or key words, with high bidders getting their ads posted alongside corresponding search results. Google defends the process as race-neutral, saying outcomes are driven by decisions by advertisers.

The study dated last week was funded in part by the National Science Foundation and a grant from Google.. The Google search page appears on a computer screen in Washington on August 30, 2010. Ads pegged to Google search results can be racially biased because of how certain names are associated with blacks or whites, according to a new study.

Ads pegged to Google search results can be racially biased because of how certain names are associated with blacks or whites, according to a new study.

Harvard University professor Latanya Sweeney found "statistically significant discrimination" when comparing ads served with results from online searches made using names associated with blacks and those with whites.

The study contrasted online searches using names such as "Ebony" and "DeShawn," with those such as "Jill" and "Geoffrey."

Ads posted alongside search results for names likely to belong to blacks tended to suggest criminal activity with offers along the lines of background checks for arrests, according to the study.

Searches using white-sounding names prompted results with neutral ads, the Sweeney's research indicated.

The findings raise "questions as to whether Google's advertising technology exposes racial bias in society and how ad and search technology can develop to assure racial fairness," Sweeney said in a blog post.

Advertisers bid on terms, or key words, with high bidders getting their ads posted alongside corresponding search results. Google defends the process as race-neutral, saying outcomes are driven by decisions by advertisers.

The study dated last week was funded in part by the National Science Foundation and a grant from Google.

(c) 2013 AFP. In a statement, Google said: "AdWords does not conduct any racial profiling. We also have an "anti" and violence policy which states that we will not allow ads that advocate against an organisation, person or group of people. It is up to individual advertisers to decide which keywords they want to choose to trigger their ads.". In a research paper recently submitted for publication, Sweeney ran more than 2,100 names of real people through Google searches. She found that names that sounded black were 25 percent more likely to trigger ads for criminal records than names that sounded white — even if, like Sweeney, the person had no criminal record.

That little display triggered a much larger research project in which Sweeney, a computer scientist and specialist in data privacy, concluded that Google searches of names more likely associated with black people often yielded advertisements for a criminal records search in that person’s name.

Latanya Sweeney , a professor of government at Harvard University, is a law-abiding citizen. So she was startled when a colleague showed her what happened when he ran her name through a Google search: an advertisement on the results page headlined ­“Latanya Sweeney, Arrested?”

Advertisement

Sweeney did not offer conclusions about exactly how this happens, or why, but said she planned further research to determine the causes.

Get Trendlines A business newsletter from Globe Columnist Larry Edelman covering the trends shaping business and the economy in Boston and beyond. Enter Email Sign Up

But the frequency with which the ads are paired to black-sounding names, said Sweeney, has real consequences.

“You could be in competition for an award, a scholarship, a new job,” she said. “You could be in a position of trust, like a professor, a judge. Having ads that show up suggestive of arrest, may actually discount your ability to function.”

For her study, Sweeney compiled lists of traditionally “black” names, such as Travon, Rasheed, Ebony, and Tamika, as well as “white” names such as Brad, Cody, Amy, and Jill.

The ads show up both on searches done on Google’s home page and on other websites that have built-in search functions and allow ads from Google to appear alongside the results. In all cases, Sweeney found the ads were from the same firm: Instant Checkmate LLC, a Las Vegas company that provides online background checks.

Advertisement

Instant Checkmate did not respond to repeated phone calls and e-mails seeking comment.

Google, meanwhile, issued a statement denying its AdWords business discriminates. AdWords is Google’s highly profitable service in which businesses pay to have their ads appear in the results when users search particular keywords or phrases.

“AdWords does not conduct any racial profiling,” said Google, adding the company’s policies prohibit advertisements “that advocate against an organization, person or group of people. It is up to individual advertisers to decide which keywords they want to choose to trigger their ads.”

Sweeney, a former professor at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, did her undergraduate work at Harvard and was the first black woman to earn a doctorate in computer science from MIT. She founded Harvard’s Data Privacy Lab, which studies ways to share personal information over computer networks without compromising privacy.

For her study, Sweeney received funding from Google.

Sweeney said executives at Instant Checkmate told her they had bought search results from Google on the names of 100 million Americans. When one of these names is searched, Google displays an ad for Instant Checkmate, and gets a small fee if the searcher clicks on its ad. The more clicks an ad receives from searchers, the more likely it will appear on the page for that search term.

Not every search of the same name yields the same result; sometimes the advertisement from Instant Checkmate is neutral, simply offering to do a background check on the person whose name is searched. Other times, the ads from Instant Checkmate were more explicit, offering to provide an arrest record or criminal history.

Advertisement

Sweeney’s results dovetail somewhat with other research on “black” names, most notably a 2004 study that found employers were less likely to respond to resumes sent by people with black-sounding names.

For her research, Sweeney compiled a list of names from the 2004 study, and from a chapter in the book “Freakonomics” on distinctively black names. She then identified 2,184 people with either distinctively white or black names and confirmed the race of about 1,400 of them by looking up their photos in Google’s image database.

She found that first names were reliable predictors of a person’s race. Someone named Brad was almost always white, while someone named DeAndre was nearly always black.

Sweeney ran the names though Internet searches in two places — the main Google website, and the news site Reuters.com, which uses Google to search its story archive. Both sites display ads generated by Google’s advertising service.

Sweeney found that searches on Google’s own website produced Instant Checkmate ads just 16 percent of the time, but 84 percent of the time when searched on Reuters.com. And at the Reuters site, searches of black-sounding names were 25 percent more likely to yield ads with offers to view the person’s arrest or criminal record.

Other websites that use a Google search window and display Google ads yielded similar results. For example, entering “Latanya Sweeney” in the search box on one of the Globe’s websites, Boston.com, generated an ad from Instant Checkmate that reads in part, “Criminal records, phone, address, & more on Latanya Sweeney.”

Advertisement

Meanwhile, plugging “Jill Sweeney” into Boston.com’s search box yielded an Instant Checkmate ad that read: “Jill Sweeney found in database,” but no mention of an arrest or criminal record.

Sweeney said she has no idea why Google searches seem to single out black-sounding names. There could be myriad issues at play, some associated with the software, some with the people searching Google. For example, the more often searchers click on a particular ad, the more frequently it is displayed subsequently.

“Since we don’t know the reason for it,” she said, “it’s hard to say what you need to do.”

But Danny Sullivan, editor of SearchEngineLand.com, an online trade publication that tracks the Internet search and advertising business, said Sweeney’s research has stirred a tempest in a teapot. “It looks like this fairly isolated thing that involves one advertiser.”

He also said that the results could be caused by black Google users clicking on those ads as much as white users.

“It could be that black people themselves could be causing the stuff that causes the negative copy to be selected more,” said Sullivan. “If most of the searches for black names are done by black people . . . is that racially biased?”

On the other hand, Sullivan said Sweeney has uncovered a problem with online searching — the casual display of information that might put someone in a bad light. Rather than focusing on potential instances of racism, he said, search services such as Google might want to put more restrictions on displaying negative information about anyone, black or white.

Advertisement

For instance, Sullivan said Google could require advertisers to remove the words “arrest record” from all their ads.

Sweeney has submitted her study to an academic journal for publication, but is not allowed to identify it. She has posted the study online at the Social Science Research Network, and at Arkiv.org, a repository of research papers maintained by Cornell University.

Hiawatha Bray can be reached at bray@globe.com.. Many people will have experience Googling friends, colleagues and relatives to find out about their online presence—the websites on which they appear, their pictures, hobbies and so on.

Sweeney’s interest is in the ads that appear alongside these results. When she entered her name in Google an ad appeared with the wording:

“Latanya Sweeney, Arrested? 1) Enter name and state 2) Access full background. Checks instantly. www.instantcheckmate.com”

This is suggestive wording. It suggests that Latanya Sweeney has a criminal record the details of which can be accessed by clicking on the ad. But after hitting the link and paying the necessary subscription fee, Sweeney says she found no record of arrest.

What’s interesting about this is that Sweeney’s first name is also suggestive–that she is black. The question Sweeney asks is whether a similar search with a name suggestive of a white racial profile also serves up ads mentioning arrest records.

The answer is a powerful wake up call. Sweeney says she has evidence that black identifying names are up to 25 per cent more likely to be served with an arrest-related ad. “There is discrimination in delivery of these ads,” she concludes.

Sweeney gathered this evidence by collecting over 2000 names that were suggestive of race. For example, first names such as Trevon, Lakisha and Darnell suggest the owner is black while names like Laurie, Brendan and Katie suggest the owner is white.

She then entered these plus surnames into Google.com and Reuters.com and examined the ads they returned. Most names generated ads for public records. However, black-identifying names turned out to be much more likely than white-identifying names to generate ads that including the word “arrest” (60 per cent versus 48 per cent). All came from www.instantcheckmate.com.. In a statement to the BBC, the company said: "We also have an 'anti' and violence policy which states that we will not allow ads that advocate against an organisation, person or group of people.". April 2, 2013

Volume 11, issue 3

PDF

Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery

Google ads, black names and white names, racial discrimination, and click advertising

Latanya Sweeney

Do online ads suggestive of arrest records appear more often with searches of black-sounding names than white-sounding names? What is a black-sounding name or white-sounding name, anyway? How many more times would an ad have to appear adversely affecting one racial group for it to be considered discrimination? Is online activity so ubiquitous that computer scientists have to think about societal consequences such as structural racism in technology design? If so, how is this technology to be built? Let's take a scientific dive into online ad delivery to find answers.

"Have you ever been arrested?" Imagine this question appearing whenever someone enters your name in a search engine. Perhaps you are in competition for an award, a scholarship, an appointment, a promotion, or a new job, or maybe you are in a position of trust, such as a professor, a physician, a banker, a judge, a manager, or a volunteer. Perhaps you are completing a rental application, selling goods, applying for a loan, joining a social club, making new friends, dating, or engaged in any one of hundreds of circumstances for which someone wants to learn more about you online. Appearing alongside your list of accomplishments is an advertisement implying you may have a criminal record, whether you actually have one or not. Worse, the ads may not appear for your competitors.

Job applications frequently include questions such as: Have you ever been arrested? Have you ever been charged with a crime? Other than a traffic ticket, have you been convicted of a crime? Employers ask these questions to establish trustworthiness. Because others often equate a criminal record with not being reliable or honest, protections exist for those having criminal records.

If an employer disqualifies a job applicant based solely upon information indicating an arrest record, the company may face legal consequences. The U.S. EEOC (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) is the federal agency charged with enforcing Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, a law that applies to most employers, prohibiting employment discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Guidance issued in 1973 extended protections to people with criminal records.5,11 Title VII does not prohibit employers from obtaining criminal background information. Certain uses of criminal information, however, such as a blanket policy or practice of excluding applicants or disqualifying employees based solely upon information indicating an arrest record, can result in a charge of discrimination.

To make a determination, the EEOC uses an adverse impact test that measures whether certain practices, intentional or not, have a disproportionate effect on a group of people whose defining characteristics are covered by Title VII. To decide, you calculate the percentage of people affected in each group and then divide the smaller value by the larger to get the ratio and compare the result to 80. For example, suppose a company laid off comparable black and white workers at the same rate—25 percent of blacks and 25 percent of whites—then the ratio, 25 divided by 25, would be 100 percent. If the ratio is less than 80 percent, then the EEOC considers the effect disproportionate and may hold the employer responsible for discrimination.6

What about online ads suggesting someone with your name has an arrest record, even when no one with your name has been arrested? Title VII does not apply unless you have an arrest record and can prove the potential employer routinely uses ads or information from the company sponsoring the ads, and the result has an inappropriate chilling effect on hiring applicants with criminal records.

The advertiser may argue the ads are commercial free speech—a constitutional right to display the ad associated with your name. The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution protects advertising. In a landmark decision, the U.S. Supreme Court set out a test for assessing government restrictions on commercial speech, which begins by determining whether the speech is misleading.3 Are online ads suggesting the existence of an arrest record misleading if no one by that name has an arrest record?

Assume the ads are free speech: what happens when these ads appear more often for one racial group than another? Not everyone is being equally affected by the free speech. Is that free speech or racial discrimination?

Racism, as defined by the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, is "any attitude, action, or institutional structure which subordinates a person or group because of their color . . . Racism is not just a matter of attitudes; actions and institutional structures can also be a form of racism."16 Racial discrimination results when a person or group of people is treated differently based on their racial origins, according to the Panel on Methods for Assessing Discrimination of the National Research Council.12 Power is a necessary precondition, because discrimination depends on the ability to give or withhold benefits, facilities, services, opportunities, etc., from someone who should be entitled to them and is denied on the basis of race. Institutional or structural racism, as defined in The Social Work Dictionary, is a system of procedures/patterns whose effect is to foster discriminatory outcomes or give preferences to members of one group over another.1

Ra