Thomas fire victim loses her home but saves ‘the most important thing’ -- her children

Gabriela Gutierrez was at home in Santa Paula watching a children’s program and snuggling with her 18-month-old daughter and 3-year-old son Monday evening when she took a call from her babysitter Adriana.

“Hey, Gaby. Have they knocked on your door? There’s a fire. They are going to start evacuating. Get your important stuff and clothes,” the babysitter told her.

What fire? Gutierrez thought to herself. It was 9:01 p.m.

The 32-year-old ran outside her mobile home on Wheeler Canyon Road into a wall of gray smoke. She panicked. Minutes later, a law enforcement official knocked on her door. He told her she had a few minutes to pack up and evacuate.

Frantically, she packed diapers for 18-month-old Genesis, a pair of shoes for 3-year-old Osiel. She grabbed clothes for all of them, medical cards, her U.S. citizenship naturalization certificate.

Gabriela Gutierrez, 32, and daughter Genesis take refuge from the Thomas fire after her home burned. (Cindy Carcamo / Los Angeles Times)

Her husband, Alex, froze, unwilling to accept that the fire was heading toward them.

“Don’t worry. The wind is blowing in another direction,” he told her.

Still, she threw her belongings and blankets into the car. That’s when she saw flames approaching. She buckled in her two children in one car. Her husband jumped into another vehicle. They headed to Gutierrez’s mother’s home.

On Tuesday morning, she returned to a steel shell of what appeared to be her mobile home. Everything was gone. The only way she could tell her two-bedroom home apart from the others that had burned were a pair of tire rims her husband planned to sell.

Alex refused to believe their home was gone. Instead he headed to work as usual at a nearby ranch, where he irrigates strawberry fields. He finally accepted the news when Gutierrez texted him photos of their charred home.

On Tuesday afternoon, Gutierrez wrangled her tots as she attempted to eat a tamale at the Santa Paula Senior Center, which served as an evacuation center for fire refugees.

Her sister, Maricela Martinez, a landscaper, kept her company and helped her care for the kids.

“Oh, no,” she said suddenly. Martinez had just gotten a text message from one of her clients.

“Hello, our house burned down today so we will not be needing yard service in the near future. I prepaid you through January, we can work it out later,” the text message said.

Martinez shook her head.

“So many people have lost their homes,” she told her sister.

Gutierrez, who was recently laid off from her job picking strawberries after the company went out of business, worried about finding a new home and paying upcoming bills. She doesn’t have rental insurance. The $700 in cash she’d saved up for Christmas presents and stored on a shelf in her home was gone. Framed pictures of her son’s baptism and daughter’s birth were destroyed. Her eyes welled with tears as she thought of the photos.

Still, she said she’s thankful for her health and what she was able to salvage from her home.

“I saved the most important thing,” she said. “My kids.”

Gutierrez said she was thankful she didn’t have to stay overnight at the evacuation center. She could stay with family, she said. Others weren’t as lucky.

Just outside the center, homeowners in a neighborhood across the street hosed down their roofs. They watched as white and gray smoke billowed up as helicopters carrying fire retardant and water flew past. From just half a mile north, the Thomas fire headed their way.. Users of popular navigation apps like Waze are warning the services directed them to neighborhoods where wildfires forced closures and evacuations.

The issue stems from the way apps like Waze help users avoid commute nightmares such as heavy traffic or construction. Largely reliant on information supplied by other drivers, when the Google-owned app notices gridlock on a user's route, it will reroute the driver to quieter streets — even they're empty because drivers had fled smoke and the threat of flames

Waze, which also works with transportation authorities and a team of local map editors to keep the app updated, says on any given day, those enflamed neighborhoods would have been shown as off limits within an hour of two. "We worked really hard Wednesday afternoon to get our maps up to date and accurate," says Waze spokesperson Chelsea Russo.

More from USA Today:

Erratic winds bedevil firefighters in California's Ventura County

Southern California wildfires: What we know now

Fire victim: 'This is what's left of our house'

Whether because the Santa Ana wind-fueled fires were spreading too fast — or some other reason — drivers Wednesday morning said the app's lag led to directions onto side-streets where fires had already closed them to traffic.

On assignment to cover the fires, a USA Today reporter midmorning Wednesday looked to Waze for an alternative route to the Getty Center museum, after fires had closed the normal route, Interstate 405 north.

The app suggested backstreets of the mansion-blanketed L.A. neighborhood of Bel Air instead, turning onto Bellagio Road, a thoroughfare that runs into the heart of Bel Air. Not noted by Waze at the time, there was a cop standing at the intersection, stopping drivers from passing through the Bel Air gates because the road led to the belly of the Skirball fire.

On Wednesday morning, there was no indication on the Waze app that any streets on the suggested route would be in fire territory, or even that there was a fire going on.

On social media, users asked Waze to update its service so it would steer drivers away from the fire. Other users sought to warn fellow drivers.

Tweet

Tweet

Tweet

Waze and Google Maps are consistently ranked among the top navigation apps on Apple's App Store. Commuters in heavily congested areas like Los Angeles rely on the apps to cut minutes or sometimes even hours from their drives, a feature that's led to a loyal following for the app.

But sometimes routes go awry.

The Los Angeles Police Department was alerting users of navigation apps to avoid using them so they don't end up near the blazes, reported "The Los Angeles Times." Waze's Russo said the LAPD was working off Wednesday morning information.

An LAPD spokesperson didn't return a immediately return a request for comment.

The app now includes closures on approximately 110 road segments in the area of the fires, as well as the locations of 16 shelters. Users can also make emergency calls from within the app.. Google's navigation app, Waze, is directing some drivers right into neighborhoods where wildfires in Southern California have forced road closures and evacuations, USA Today reported Thursday.

Roads closed as a result of the wind-whipped fires have no traffic on them, apparently making them attractive to Waze's algorithms, the outlet reported. Waze says it has been working to correct the issue, USA Today reported.

A spokeswoman told the outlet the app has been in contact with local authorities to correctly label which roads are off limits within several hours of their closure.

"We worked really hard Wednesday afternoon to get our maps up to date and accurate," Waze spokeswoman Chelsea Russo told USA Today.

Users did not hold back on their criticism — and tweeted out warnings to other drivers.

I don't trust Waze. It just told me I could save 8 minutes by driving right thru a wild fire off the 405 Freeway. — Andy Ruther (@AndyRuther) December 6, 2017. . . Waze users in California are reporting the navigation app is leading them into neighborhoods where wildfires have forced closures and evacuations.

Users of popular navigation apps like Waze are warning the services directed them to neighborhoods where wildfires forced closures and evacuations.

The issue stems from the way apps like Waze help users avoid commute nightmares such as heavy traffic or construction. Largely reliant on information supplied by other drivers, when the Google-owned app notices gridlock on a user's route, it will reroute the driver to quieter streets — even if they're empty because drivers had fled smoke and the threat of flames.

Waze, which also works with transportation authorities and a team of local map editors to keep the app updated, says on any given day, those enflamed neighborhoods would have been shown as off limits within an hour of two. "We worked really hard Wednesday afternoon to get our maps up to date and accurate," says Waze spokesperson Chelsea Russo.

Whether because the Santa Ana wind-fueled fires were spreading too fast — or some other reason — drivers Wednesday morning said the app's lag led to directions onto side-streets where fires had already closed them to traffic.

On assignment to cover the fires, a USA TODAY reporter midmorning Wednesday looked to Waze for an alternative route to the Getty Center museum, after fires had closed the normal route, Interstate 405 north.

The app suggested backstreets of the mansion-blanketed L.A. neighborhood of Bel Air instead, turning onto Bellagio Road, a thoroughfare that runs into the heart of Bel Air. Not noted by Waze at the time, there was a cop standing at the intersection, stopping drivers from passing through the Bel Air gates because the road led to the belly of the Skirball fire.

On Wednesday morning, there was no indication on the Waze app that any streets on the suggested route would be in fire territory, or even that there was a fire going on. That didn't change on Thursday either.

On social media, users asked Waze to update its service so it would steer drivers away from the fire. Other users sought to warn fellow drivers.

Google maps, waze, and apple maps all seem to think I can take the 405 to work and drive right through the fire without any problems. That's a problem. — Punk&Spice Latte (@sch4) December 6, 2017

Google maps, waze, and apple maps all seem to think I can take the 405 to work and drive right through the fire without any problems. That's a problem. — Punk&Spice Latte (@sch4) December 6, 2017 @waze 405 south and northbound in Los Angeles closed due to huge fire. Can you update the maps so I get rerouted? Since I am not in that area it won't let me make as closed — 401(k) Expert (@401kexpert) December 6, 2017 I don't trust Waze. It just told me I could save 8 minutes by driving right thru a wild fire off the 405 Freeway. — Andy Ruther (@AndyRuther) December 6, 2017 Waze and Google Maps are consistently ranked among the top navigation apps on Apple's App Store. Commuters in heavily congested areas like Los Angeles rely on the apps to cut minutes or sometimes even hours from their drives, a feature that's led to a loyal following for the app.

But sometimes routes go awry.

The Los Angeles Police Department was alerting users of navigation apps to avoid using them so they don't end up near the blazes, reported The Los Angeles Times. Waze's Russo said the LAPD was working off Wednesday morning information.

An LAPD spokesperson didn't return a immediately return a request for comment.

The app now includes closures on approximately 110 road segments in the area of the fires, as well as the locations of 16 shelters, according to Waze. Users can also make emergency calls from within the app.

What you don't see in Waze, or the other transportation apps, are notices that you may be driving into a fire area. A query for directions from Los Angeles to Santa Paula, where are there are many fire-related closures, for instance, would normally call for traveling north on 101 and switching to the 126 freeway. But Waze Thursday instead called for many backroads--which could be expected, but with no mention of the fire-related alternative route.. LOS ANGELES During this week’s wildfires, navigation apps like Waze and Google Maps were guiding drivers into evacuation areas and caused congestion where officials were ordering streets closed, according to a motion introduced by Los Angeles City Councilman Paul Koretz on Friday, Dec. 8.

Related Articles Local News | State Farm shedding 72,000 home insurance policies in California

State Farm shedding 72,000 home insurance policies in California Local News | Catastrophe modeling proposal would reshape California’s home insurance

Catastrophe modeling proposal would reshape California’s home insurance Local News | Infernos rage from Texas to Australia as fire season kicks off early

Infernos rage from Texas to Australia as fire season kicks off early Local News | More resources, cooler weather tamp down Texas Panhandle wildfires

More resources, cooler weather tamp down Texas Panhandle wildfires Local News | Firefighters face difficult weather conditions as they battle the largest wildfire in Texas history The Creek and Skirball fires caused large-scale evacuations of streets and neighborhoods, and the motion says that navigation apps were directing

drivers to those areas because the data indicated there was no traffic there.

“Cut-through traffic directed by Waze and other navigation apps has long created problems in many residential neighborhoods. But on the day of the

Skirball fire evacuation, drivers’ phones were navigating them into the fire zone, onto streets they weren’t familiar with,” Koretz told City News Service.

“Not only did it steer them into life-threatening danger, but it caused congestion where public safety officials were ordering streets cleared so residents under evacuation orders could safely get out and we could get our fire equipment in. With a simple change in the program code this could be avoided in the future,” he said.

The motion would direct the fire department and Department of Transportation to report on efforts to coordinate with navigation app developers to prevent their apps from directing drivers into evacuated areas.. The Los Angeles Police Department is reportedly telling motorists to avoid using navigation apps when attempting to circumvent the region's wildfires.

According to the Los Angeles Times, authorities fear that these programs will guide motorists "onto more open routes -- in this case, streets in the neighborhoods that are on fire."

However, when Roadshow reached the LAPD for comment on Thursday, they initially acknowledged that they were still investigating how to advise motorists on this issue. A subsequent conversation I had with officer Mike Lopez, LAPD public information officer, offered some clarification: "We're not saying not to use your navigation, but [we advise] to use them with caution anywhere near the fires." Lopez reiterated fears that some programs may lead motorists directly into danger's path.

Some navigation apps, like Google's Waze, provide the ability for users to call out road hazards including weather, heavy traffic, vehicles and objects in the road, or even request roadside assistance. Many, however, do not.

Lopez acknowledged that certain navigation apps may be smarter than others when it comes to dealing with emergency situations like the LA wildfires, but he urged caution when using all apps, and said that the LAPD would not endorse using a particular program over another in such instances.

Enlarge Image LA authorities are urging motorists to be careful when using navigation apps to avoid the region's wildfires. Waze

I also spoke with Sergeant Frank Preciado of the LAPD, and he noted that officers are strategically posted at the junction of key ingress and egress roads to prevent motorists from inadvertently driving into the path of the wildfires. Above all, local authorities are urging motorists to heed the instructions of police and fire officials, including when it comes to obeying roadblocks.

According to a Google spokesperson reached for comment:

"To provide access to accurate and useful transportation information, we use algorithmic and manual methods to account for everyday and emergency road closures. These road closures also appear on our LA Fire Crisis Map, embedded as part of our SOS Alert on Search. We'll continue to update the map in real time to address the changing conditions on the ground and help Los Angelenos get around safely."

In an email to Roadshow, Waze spokesperson, Terry Wei, said, "We are the only resource that will have real-time routing, up-to-date evacuation routes and information on open resources like gas stations, etc." According to Waze data, around 110 road segments are closed, and there are 16 shelters available in 16 area cities. Wei also noted that Waze users "can search the word 'Help' to find their nearest shelter, or pan on the map and click on the shelter icon."

Apple did not immediately return a request for comment.

But if social media postings are to be believed, even Waze was at least occasionally befuddled by the region's fast-moving fires. A USA Today article published Thursday afternoon quotes several social media users as saying that Waze was among the mapping programs that failed to recognize the 405 Freeway's fire-related closure. App users experienced problematic routing that directed them toward fire-endangered roads both Wednesday and Thursday, according to the newspaper.

Southern California is being wracked by wildfires that are destroying homes, businesses and impacting travel. According to the Los Angeles Daily News, the new Skirball fire near Bel-Air has reportedly grown to 475 acres alone, and triggered the 405 Freeway's temporary closure. The fire is estimated to only be 5% contained, and stiff winds are expected to fan the flames today, making firefighters' jobs more difficult.

Some auto industry watchers are looking at the LA fires and wondering aloud on social media if natural disasters like these could impact the future adoption of self-driving cars. Others are curious if technological steps are being taken to systematically enable local authorities to update mapping services in real-time with relevant information during emergencies.

In September, amidst an altogether different type of natural disaster, Google's Waze Carpool app was turned on in states affected by Hurricane Harvey to enable residents to find ridesharing opportunities. The company also started a Facebook page to crowdsource information on road closures and hazards in the area at the time.

First published Dec. 7, 9:05 a.m. PT.

Update, 10:15 a.m.: This story has been updated to reflect new statements made by members of the LAPD.

Update, 10:45 a.m.: Google statement added.

Update, 11:15 a.m.: Waze statement added.

Update, 4:25 p.m.: USA Today article references added.. Community Corner Traffic App Waze Causes Headaches Across LA County: Councilman Traffic apps have been clogging side streets with harried drivers and sending them into evacuated areas during emergencies, councilman says.

LOS ANGELES, CA — Mobile traffic applications such as Waze are causing a dangerous flood of traffic to be funneled onto tiny Los Angeles side streets, and the city should develop ways to curb the apps from diverting drivers off of major thoroughfares, a Los Angeles city councilman said Wednesday.

"Residents in my district and throughout the city have experienced a major surge in dangerous and disruptive cut-through traffic in recent years," said Paul Krekorian, who represents parts of the San Fernando Valley, including Studio City and North Hollywood. "Mobile app makers are sacrificing the quality of life in our neighborhoods, just so drivers can save a few seconds or minutes with an alternate route," he said. "We have an obligation to see what can be done to protect our neighborhoods and prevent these apps from continuing to divert drivers from major avenues onto small residential streets that aren't designed to accommodate high-volume traffic."

The city has a data sharing agreement with Waze, and Krekorian introduced a motion that would direct the city's Department of Transportation to report to the City Council on the current partnership with Waze and other app operators, including detailing what information L.A. gives them and what the city gets from them. The motion would also ask the department what efforts it has made to get the app companies to address neighborhood concerns, call on the city attorney to analyze whether app companies share liability for damages in collisions caused by their users, and urge the City Council to request the app companies make their representatives available to work with the city" to reduce problems caused by their technology."

Google, which owns Waze, did not immediately respond to a request to comment. Krekorian introduced a similar motion in 2015 that asked Waze to partner with the city and alleviate traffic on residential streets, but he said Waze ignored the request.

"The real-world neighborhood impacts of sending distracted, stressed and/or lost drivers down unfamiliar streets remain," Krekorian's new motion says. "And while there are certainly other factors that contribute to the overwhelming amount of traffic in narrow, neighborhood feeder streets, map app makers -- like Google, Apple and Waze -- have shown little interest in helping neighborhoods reduce the hazards on their streets." Krekorian is not the only council member to raise issues about Waze and safety.

During a series of wildfires in December, navigation apps like Waze and Google Maps were guiding drivers into evacuation areas and caused congestion where officials were ordering streets closed, according to a pending motion introduced that month by Los Angeles City Councilman Paul Koretz. The Creek and Skirball fires, near Sylmar and Bel-Air, respectively, caused large-scale evacuations of streets and neighborhoods, and the motion said navigation apps were directing drivers to those areas because the data indicated there was no traffic there. "Cut-through traffic directed by Waze and other navigation apps has long created problems in many residential neighborhoods. But on the day of the Skirball Fire evacuation, drivers' phones were navigating them into the fire zone, onto streets they weren't familiar with," Koretz told City News Service when he introduced the motion. "Not only did it steer them into life-threatening danger, but it caused congestion where public safety officials were ordering streets cleared so residents under evacuation orders could safely get out and we could get our fire equipment in," he said. "With a simple change in the program code, this could be avoided in the future." Koretz's motion would direct the fire department and Department of Transportation to report on efforts to coordinate with navigation app developers to prevent their apps from directing drivers into evacuated areas.

City News Service; Photo By Patch. LOS ANGELES During this week’s wildfires, navigation apps like Waze and Google Maps were guiding drivers into evacuation areas and caused congestion where officials were ordering streets closed, according to a motion introduced by Los Angeles City Councilman Paul Koretz on Friday, Dec. 8.

Related Articles Local News | State Farm shedding 72,000 home insurance policies in California

State Farm shedding 72,000 home insurance policies in California Local News | Catastrophe modeling proposal would reshape California’s home insurance

Catastrophe modeling proposal would reshape California’s home insurance Local News | Infernos rage from Texas to Australia as fire season kicks off early

Infernos rage from Texas to Australia as fire season kicks off early Local News | More resources, cooler weather tamp down Texas Panhandle wildfires

More resources, cooler weather tamp down Texas Panhandle wildfires Local News | Firefighters face difficult weather conditions as they battle the largest wildfire in Texas history The Creek and Skirball fires caused large-scale evacuations of streets and neighborhoods, and the motion says that navigation apps were directing

drivers to those areas because the data indicated there was no traffic there.

“Cut-through traffic directed by Waze and other navigation apps has long created problems in many residential neighborhoods. But on the day of the

Skirball fire evacuation, drivers’ phones were navigating them into the fire zone, onto streets they weren’t familiar with,” Koretz told City News Service.

“Not only did it steer them into life-threatening danger, but it caused congestion where public safety officials were ordering streets cleared so residents under evacuation orders could safely get out and we could get our fire equipment in. With a simple change in the program code this could be avoided in the future,” he said.

The motion would direct the fire department and Department of Transportation to report on efforts to coordinate with navigation app developers to prevent their apps from directing drivers into evacuated areas.. Help us raise the essential funds to keep trustworthy reporting strong in your community. With your financial partnership we can highlight local stories, hold the powerful accountable, and amplify community voices. Your support keeps local journalism strong. Stand with LAist today.

Keep up with LAist. If you're enjoying this article, you'll love our daily morning newsletter, How To LA. Every weekday, you'll get fresh, community-driven stories that catch you up with our independent local news. Subscribe

The Los Angeles Police Department cautioned drivers this week not to use navigation apps like Google Maps and Waze while trying to find their way from a fire zone.

Officials said some drivers attempting to circumvent the Skirball Fire, which shut down the 405 in the Sepulveda Pass, were routed into neighborhoods that were burning and under evacuation orders.

While navigation apps for smart phones can provide a great service in times of emergencies, the data they use don't always reflect the threats on the ground.

Waze Mobile does collaborate with agencies and local jurisdictions, such as the city of Los Angeles, to update routes with information on construction zones and road closures.

But in a fast-moving situation like the fires this week, that data can be limited as well as slow to update on the app.

Representatives from the Los Angeles Department of Transportation said information about road closures filters through several verification checks starting from field officers on the ground before it is reported to Waze. The department doesn't collaborate with Google Maps, but the app pulls some alerts from Waze, which is also owned by Google.

Each navigation app operates by its own proprietary algorithm to calculate the best route. It is based on variables like speed, distance, traffic dynamics and level of preference for main roads over small neighborhood streets.

It's possible in the case of the latest fires that some empty roads in the line of the flames could have appeared as attractive routes to the algorithm, because no data about the borders of the evacuation zone were transmitted to the apps.

Waze is known for prioritizing shorter trips very highly, with lower priority given to keeping to main roads.

Residents in the neighborhoods along the 405 through Sepulveda Pass have complained for years that the Waze app has sent a stream of heavy traffic through their narrow canyon roads, which hamper emergency response even on a good day.

Los Angeles City Councilman Paul Krekorian has even tried to get Waze to remove some smaller streets in the area from its routing, but to no avail.

Waze does allow users to submit warnings about traffic obstructions or dangers, but it doesn't always change the route to avoid the dangerous areas.

Waze and Google officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Officials say the best bet for drivers is to monitor emergency notices and steer clear of the roads and neighborhoods where a disaster is affecting traffic.. LOS ANGELES—Users of popular navigation apps like Waze are warning the services directed them to neighborhoods where wildfires forced closures and evacuations.

The issue stems from the way apps like Waze help users avoid commute nightmares such as heavy traffic or construction. Largely reliant on information supplied by other drivers, when the Google-owned app notices gridlock on a user's route, it will reroute the driver to quieter streets — even if they're empty because drivers have fled smoke and the threat of flames.

Waze, which also works with transportation authorities and a team of local map editors to keep the app updated, says on any given day, those enflamed neighborhoods would have been shown as off limits within an hour of two. "We worked really hard Wednesday afternoon to get our maps up to date and accurate," says Waze spokesperson Chelsea Russo.

Whether because the Santa Ana wind-fueled fires were spreading too fast — or some other reason — drivers Wednesday morning said the app's lag led to directions onto side-streets where fires had already closed them to traffic.

On assignment to cover the fires, a USA TODAY reporter midmorning Wednesday looked to Waze for an alternative route to the Getty Center museum, after fires had closed the normal route, Interstate 405 north.

The app suggested backstreets of the mansion-blanketed L.A. neighborhood of Bel Air instead, turning onto Bellagio Road, a thoroughfare that runs into the heart of Bel Air. Not noted by Waze at 