. It was 7am when my phone rang. Instead of an alarm, it was my recruiter disturbing me from a pleasant dream. It was too early for a phone call or to be caught off guard, so I did not answer. I went to take a shower and get ready for the day. On my way to work, I listened to the voice mail she had left.

"Oh my God, are you OK!"

In the company's directory, there are several people that shared the same first and last name as me. I was OK. So she must have dialed the wrong phone number. I assumed somewhere, an employee named Ibrahim Diallo, was in trouble. But not me.

At work, when I scanned my key card at the turnstile, it flashed red, made a grumpy beep, and refused to disengage. I tried it a few more times, it kept flashing red and grumping. I threw a glance at Jose and made sure to make eye contact. He shrugged. A moment later he laughed then pressed a button under his desk and the turnstile turned open. Jose was one of the security guards in the LA-1 skyscraper I worked in.

I immediately called the recruiter back and it went something like this:

Recruiter: Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday?

Me: Yes I did.

R: Is everything OK?

M: Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem?

R: I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building?

M: I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening?

R: I think there is a confusion. I'll ask my manager then I will call you back.

Jose has seen me come to work everyday through those doors for more than half a year. I believe this was his idea of a joke. He must have disabled the turnstile right before I was to scan my key card. I went straight to my manager to see "If everything was OK."

Me: Hi!

Sam (manager): Hi Ibrahim, how are you?

Me: I'm fine. I received a call from my recruiter. Did you want to talk to me?

Sam: No, I don't think so. Did she tell you what the problem was?

Me: No. She said she will call me back. I'll wait for her call, I guess.

I did not receive a call from her. Nothing interesting happened on that day, just good Ol' work routine.

The next day I drove my car to the parking structure and heard the same grumpy beep when I scanned my card. There was a long line of cars forming behind me, the drivers were getting impatient and some had started to honk at me already. It's a long one way corridor where getting out of the lane was not an option. I silently panicked. A security guard appeared, gave me a look, shook his head disappointed, then used his own card to let me in. I embarrassingly drove all the way to the 8th floor.

Inside the building, my card failed again, and the loud grumpy beep made sure everyone was aware of it. Jose let me in once more.

It wasn't the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it. As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away. In the meanwhile, every morning the security guard would have to print a temporary badge for me that would expire by 7pm. Small price to pay.

I went to my desk and worked for a few hours on hardware. When I was done, I logged into my Windows machine to mark my Jira ticket as completed, that's when I noticed that I had been logged out of Jira. I tried my jira credentials multiple times and they did not work.

On my floor, there was a poster at the very entrance. An employee made a New Yorker style comic with two employees talking from across their cubicles. These were the words:

Is JIRA down?

Yes, JIRA is down!

Jira is always down. So I asked my coworker in the next cubicle if JIRA was working for him. He answered Yes. Then I asked him to look for my ticket number. He opened it. Right next to my name on this ticket, it had the word (Inactive) and my name was grayed out.

That's something the manager could sort out, but it was lunch time. I went down to the cafeteria and ordered a nice black bean burger, a healthy diet is important if your work consists off sitting down all day. I went for my usual after-lunch one mile walk, again this counters sitting down all day.

Of course, when I come back, I take the stairs up to the 11th floor. Very hard, but you know, sitting down all day is not good. The only problem was that I forgot that when I reached the 11th floor, I would have to scan my key card to leave the stairs. That card reader reminded me with the slowest, meanest, and grumpiest beep an 8 bit machine could make. I was stuck on the stairs. I sat there for 10 minutes until a fellow stair taker opened the door for me. I sneaked into the floor like a common thief.

That's when my recruiter called me in panic apologizing again and asking if everything was OK. She told me she had received an email saying I was terminated. I told my manager right away, and she was surprised because she received no such information. She couldn't understand why my JIRA was disabled but the system wouldn't allow her to enable my account. She created a JIRA ticket for the support team to re-enable my account.

Back at my desk, there was a big scary (and threatening) error message on my screen. It asked me to restart my computer immediately. I did not comply. Well, I had a few hundred windows open and multiple programming environments running. I just dismissed the box. I knew that if I restarted that computer, I wouldn't be able to log back in.

Instead, I logged into Confluence to document my work for the rest of the day.

The next day, I took Uber to work, I didn't want to deal with the parking again. Jose couldn't print a temporary badge for me because my name appeared in RED and flagged in the system. My manager had to come down to escort me into the building. The recruiter sent me a message telling me not to go to work. She had just received a message that my badge had been used while I had been terminated. I was already in the building. We got the Director involved.

What the Hell is happening? Am I fired or not.

The director laughed. She was a tall elegant woman with the confidence of a countess. She stretched her arm, unhooked the phone and dialed the number for support with the one same hand. With her might and title, she ordered them to immediately restore everything back to normal and hung up. She assured me that everything will be alright, to get back to work and this would be solved by the end of the day. I was still there in her office and saw her face when she got this email:

I was successfully terminated. Case closed.

In the meanwhile, there was an emergency on the multimillion dollar tool I was working on. Hundred of thousands of records were missing and the web interface was not responding. I went to my desk only to see that my Windows machine had been automatically restarted (Damn you Microsoft) and my account had been disabled.

Thank God I had my CentOS machine. The regular tools I use for development were no longer accessible. I had to hack my way into the server to restart it, debug it, reactivate all the services, and reprocess the data.

Before I left the building I went to see the director that was still on the phone with support. She gave me the green light to come to work the next day.

The next day, I had been locked out off every single system except my Linux machine. Even the service we used to log our hours to get paid had been deactivated. I spent the first half of the day documenting my work.

After lunch, two people appeared at my desk. One was a familiar long face that seemed to avoid making direct eye contact. It was Jose and his fellow security guard. He cordially informed me that he was to escort me out of the building.

The director was furious. They had received a very threatening email to escort me out of the building and were just doing their job.

"Who the hell is sending those emails!?"

I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.

Over the next 3 weeks, I was CCed on the emails about my case. I watched it be escalated to bigger and more powerful titles over and over, yet no one could do anything about it. From time to time, they would attach a system email. It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. Disable this, disable that, revoke access here, revoke access there, escort out of premises, etc.

The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim.

I had worked there for more than 8 months and my work spoke for itself. I was receiving constant praises, people were fascinated by my work. I was getting along super well with every one. I like to believe that I never did anything wrong to anyone... This was a great reminder of the frailty of job security.

Eventually the problem was solved. My recruiter called me one morning and told me that I can come back to work. I had missed 3 weeks of work by that time, and pay. Once on site, I got an explanation.

Once the order for employee termination is put in, the system takes over. All the necessary orders are sent automatically and each order completion triggers another order. For example, when the order for disabling my key card is sent, there is no way of it to be re-enabled. Once it is disabled, an email is sent to security about recently dismissed employees. Scanning the key card is a red flag. The order to disable my Windows account is also sent. There is also one for my JIRA account. And on and on. There is no way to stop the multi-day long process. I had to be rehired as a new employee. Meaning I had to fill up paperwork, set up direct deposit, wait for Fedex to ship a new key card.

But at the end of the day the question is still, why was I terminated in the first place?

I was on a 3 years contract and had only worked for 8 months. Just before I was hired, this company was acquired by a much larger company and I joined during the transition. My manager at the time was from the previous administration. One morning I came to work to see that his desk had been wiped clean, as if he was disappeared. As a full time employee, he had been laid off. He was to work from home as a contractor for the duration of a transition. I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that. Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system.

I was very comfortable at the job. I had learned the in-and-out of all the systems I worked on. I had made friends at work. I had created a routine around the job. I became the go-to guy. I was comfortable.

When my contract expired, the machine took over and fired me.

A simple automation mistake(feature) caused everything to collapse. I was escorted out of the building like a thief, I had to explain to people why I am not at work, my coworkers became distant (except my manager who was exceptionally supportive). Despite the great opportunity it was for me to work at such a big company, I decided to take the next opportunity that presented itself.

What I called job security was only an illusion. I couldn't help but imagine what would have happened if I had actually made a mistake in this company. Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake. I missed 3 weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine.

At least a year later, I can sit here and write about it without feeling too embarrassed. So that's the story about the machine that fired me and no human could do anything about it.

PS: I am willing to bet the recent issue with YouTube Piracy filter blocking MIT courses and the Blender Foundation are the result of The Machine being the ultimate decider. Even though YouTube's support team clearly knows that these don't violate terms and conditions, the Machine decided otherwise. And they will have to fight it to death to bring the videos back online.. . A California software developer has published a viral blog post recounting his experience of being fired by a machine – and how his bosses were powerless to stop it.

Ibrahim Diallo had been working at a Los Angeles company for just eight months of his three-year contract when his key card stopped working – and he had to rely on the security guard to allow him entry.

“It wasn’t the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it,” Diallo wrote in his blog post. “As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away.”

Egyptian-born Diallo then noticed that he had been logged out of his work system and that the word ‘inactive’ was listed alongside his name.

That same day, he was told by his recruiter that she had received an automated email from the work system to say his contract had been terminated.

However, he was reassured by his director that the problem would be resolved and he was given the green light to come into work the following day.

The next day he had been locked out of almost every single system. Later that afternoon, two security guards escorted him out of the building after they’d received a “very threatening email” ordering them to do so.

He wrote: “I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.

“The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim.”

The problem was eventually resolved after three weeks and Diallo found out why he was terminated in the first place.

Just before he was hired on a three-year contract, the company was acquired by a larger organisation and he joined during this transition.

His previous manager had been laid off as a full-time employee and was told to work from home as a contractor for the duration of his contract.

“I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that,” Diallo wrote. “Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system.

“When my contract expired, the machine took over and fired me.”

According to the software developer, he missed three weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine. Although he was back at work, he eventually decided to take a new job.

“Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake,” he said.. 'The Machine Fired Me' -- a blog post by Ibrahim Diallo speaks of exactly what it is titled. Diallo was literally fired by a machine one fine day. He realised it after his security pass stopped working, his computer system login was disabled, and finally he was hustled from the building by security personnel. He hopes that his detailed story in his blog will serve as a warning to firms about relying too much on automation.

Diallo's firing

advertisement

After having to enter his office with the help of his security guard, failing to log in to his computer, and a long wait, he was told by his recruiter that she had received an email saying his contract was terminated.

She promised to sort out the problem.

As Diallo entered his Los Angeles office the next day, he'd been locked out of every single system "except my Linux machine" and then, after lunch, two people appeared at his desk to inform him that an email had been received telling them to escort him from the building.

Diallo's manager couldn't do anything about it

Ibrahim's boss was confused but helpless.

I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it.

Adding to the uncontrollable situation, Diallo writes: "They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building".

"I watched it be escalated to bigger and more powerful titles over and over, yet no-one could do anything about it."

"From time-to-time, they would attach a system email," he laments.

System-generated e-mail sent to Ibrahim instructing his termination. (Courtesy: Ibrahim Diallo's blog)

At the time that he was fired, he was eight months into a three-year contract and over the next three weeks he was copied into emails about his case.

"It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. Disable this, disable that, revoke access here, revoke access there, escort out of premises, etc," writes Ibrahim on the ruthlessness of the system.

The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim

Why did the machine fire him after all?

A three weeks' time is what it took Ibrahim's bosses to really figure why he had been fired.

His firm was going through changes, both in terms of the systems it used and the people it employed.

His original manager had been recently laid off and sent to work from home for the rest of his time at the firm and in that period he had not renewed Diallo's contract in the new system.

advertisement

This is the point when the machines took over -- dismissing him as an ex-employee.

"All the necessary orders are sent automatically and each order completion triggers another order. For example, when the order for disabling my key card is sent, there is no way of it to be re-enabled."

Further explaining the nature of the structure, he adds that "once it is disabled, an email is sent to security about recently dismissed employees. Scanning the key card is a red flag. The order to disable my Windows account is also sent. There is also one for my Jira account. And on and on".

"It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate," lamented Diallo about the machine's ruthlessness.

Diallo's final goodbye

Even though Diallo was allowed to get back to work, he had missed out on three weeks' worth of pay and been escorted from the building "like a thief".

He also had to explain his disappearance to others and found that his co-workers had become distant, so he decided to move to another job.

It's another example of a failure of human thinking where they allow it to be humans versus machines rather than humans plus machines - says Dallio

advertisement

Here's where he starts speaking about the role of Artificial Intelligence in mitigating the situation.

Here is how AI could have saved him

"One of the fundamental skills for all humans in an AI world is accountability -- just because the algorithm says it's the answer, it doesn't mean it actually is," explain Ibrahim.

The systems displayed no knowledge-based intelligence, meaning they didn't have a model designed to encapsulate knowledge (such as human resources expertise) in the form of rules, text and logical links.

At the same time, the systems showed no intelligence like the ability to learn from datasets such as recognising the factors that might lead to someone being fired.

As phys.org puts it, Ibrahim was fired as a result of an old-fashioned and poorly designed system triggered by a human error.

A more practical AI system could use a mix of techniques to make it smarter.

For instance, an AI system could've learned the rules to be applied to the nuances of real situations from the company's HR records.

To be more specific, an AI concept called "fuzzy logic" can interpret situations that aren't only black and white, applying evidence and conclusions in varying degrees to avoid the kind of stark decision-making that led to Diallo's dismissal.

What about you? Would you still prefer a human manager, as you find human contact essential, no matter how convincing the AI chatbot might be? Tell us in the comments section below.

advertisement

Read: India's Artificial Intelligence scene is set to explode, thanks to this Google-Niti Aayog tie-up. A tech worker in the US lost his job due to the company's automated systems removing him from the rolls eight months into a three-year contract because his manager did not update his contract terms.

It appears to be one of the first cases of a worker being unable to go to work because of the use of artificial intelligence to manage processes such as hiring and firing.

Ibrahim Diallo, a software developer with a company in Los Angeles, said the first inkling he had that there was trouble ahead came when he received a phone call from his recruiter - the woman who had found him the job - at 7am sometime in March last year.

Her voice message was simple: "Oh my God, are you OK!" He thought he had been mistaken for someone else with the same first name.

When he reached work — no mention was made of the company he worked for apart from the fact that it was in the LA-1 skyscraper — his keycard did not work, so he asked the guard to let him in.

He then called his recruiter and had the following conversation:

Recruiter: Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday?

Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday? Diallo: Yes I did.

Yes I did. R: Is everything OK?

Is everything OK? D: Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem?

Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem? R: I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building?

I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building? D: I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening?

I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening? R: I think there is a confusion. I'll ask my manager then I will call you back.

Diallo, a native of Guinea who has lived in Egypt for a while before settling in the US, spoke to his manager but did not receive any indication that anything was wrong.

The next day, his card did not work at the parking gate and he had to be let in by the security guard. Once inside, he found his card did not allow him access to the office.

The email sent by Diallo's director and the reply she received.

After working for some time on his Linux machine, he logged onto his Windows machine to mark a JIRA ticket as completed. But he had been logged out of JIRA and could not get back despite trying numerous times.

Since the system was working for others, Diallo asked a colleague to check his ticket number and noticed that the word "Inactive" was present next to the number.

After lunch, he walked up 11 flights of stairs for the exercise but found that he could not get into the office. Soon after this, his recruiter called him and told him that she had received an email saying that he had been sacked.

Diallo asked his manager to enable his JIRA account but she found she could not and opened a ticket for the support team to attend to it.

The next day, 10 March 2017, he used Uber to get to work but found that the gate supervisor could not print a temporary pass for him as his name was in RED and flagged in the system.

After getting into the building, Diallo contacted the director at the company. She asked the support supervisor about it by email and received a reply saying that Diallo had been terminated as of 1 March 2017.

The following day, he found himself locked out of every single system at his office, apart from his Linux machine. At lunch time, two security people appeared and said they had to escort him from the building, as they had received a threatening email asking them to do so.

Over the next three weeks, Diallo was copied in on the emails that went between his director and company higher-ups. Finally, he was told that the problem had been solved and called back to work. By then, he had been away for three weeks and not been paid.

The explanation he gave was this: "Just before I was hired, this company was acquired by a much larger company and I joined during the transition. My manager at the time was from the previous administration.

"One morning I came to work to see that his desk had been wiped clean, as if he was disappeared. As a full-time employee, he had been laid off. He was to work from home as a contractor for the duration of a transition. I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that. Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system."

And he added: "A simple automation mistake (feature) caused everything to collapse. I was escorted out of the building like a thief, I had to explain to people why I am not at work, my co-workers became distant (except my manager who was exceptionally supportive).

"Despite the great opportunity it was for me to work at such a big company, I decided to take the next opportunity that presented itself.". . A real AI could have saved this man from being fired by a computer

Artificial Intelligence (AI) are becoming more common in industries such as banks, insurance companies, wealth management firms, factories, ecommerce, retail firms, train stations, hotels and other service industries. While there is a constant fear of AI taking over human jobs in the future, in this particular case, an error made by a human cost an employee his job.

Ibrahim Diallo, a Californian software developer, was fired from his job by a machine, because his previous manager hadn’t renewed his contract on the new computer system that lead to various automated systems get into action and in the end, him being escorted from the office building by two security guards. What’s more ironic, that even his managers were powerless to stop it.

“I was fired,” Diallo who shared his story in a detailed blog post said. “There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.”

As an advisory tale about the dangers of automation, Diallo hopes that companies take it as a lesson to not be over-dependent on automation.

Look like i made hacknews top #1 today!!! Thoroughly enjoyed the comments The machine Fired me#TheMachineFiredMe Artcle: https://t.co/D89JrwjmMF Comments: https://t.co/5yYHvAuCuE pic.twitter.com/peOMk0RO8t — Ibrahim Diallo (@dialloibu) June 20, 2018

Diallo had been working for just eight months of his three-year-long contract with the company in Los Angeles when one day his keycard, which granted him entry to work, stopped working.

“It wasn’t the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it,” Diallo wrote in his blog post. “As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away.”

This was just the start of bizarre events that took place over a few subsequent days, with things like his entry card into office not working, systems not allowing him to log in, notifications like ‘access barred’ etc. In fact, even the word ‘inactive’ was mentioned alongside his name. Diallo had to be sent home for three weeks when it all came to a head when a security guard came to escort him out of the building. He had been fired: a series of automated emails notifying it, had gone out to multiple people, and managers could do nothing.

After many weeks it was figured out Diallo had joined at a time when his company had been bought over by another. His direct manager who was part of the previous organization had been laid off and was sent to work from home during a transitional period. His ex-boss basically stopped doing anything, which also included non-renewal of Diallo’s contract in the new system. Once the machines took over, it triggered the automated, irreversible, algorithmic termination process, which persistently discontinued all of Diallo’s company access. As a result, human intervention became fruitless, which finally resulted in Diallo’s termination. Although, Diallo was reinstated later, he chose to move on to another job.

The entire incident brought to light that the AI systems had no knowledge-based intelligence (such as human resources expertise in the form of rules, text and logical link) nor did it have computational intelligence (the ability to learn from datasets – such as identifying the factors that might lead to dismissal). At the end of it, it was an old-fashioned and poorly designed system that saw Diallo get fired due to human error, which was neither communicated nor explained. What also came to light was the lack of humanity shown and also the inflexibility and ineffectiveness of the AI.

In scenarios, where one has lost his or her job and livelihood, it requires sensitivity and understanding to handle the situation, which is only possible through human contact and not through an AI chatbot. In other words, any job that involves managing people, applying experti