The driver behind the wheel of an autonomous Uber vehicle that fatally struck a woman in Tempe in March was watching "The Voice" via a streaming service in the minutes leading up to the crash, a police report says.

The detailed report of more than 300 pages was released by Tempe police Thursday night, along with video and photos from the scene of the March 18 collision. Also released was the 911 call made by the driver, Rafaela Vasquez, 44, after the crash.

The documents indicate police are seeking manslaughter charges against Vasquez.

The Mill Avenue collision, which killed 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg as she walked across the street midblock, was the first fatal crash with a pedestrian and a self-driving car.

UBER IN ARIZONA: A timeline of events leading up to shutdown of self-driving cars

The material includes blurred video from officers' body cameras. One video captures an officer's conversation with Vasquez still seated behind the wheel.

"The car was in auto-drive," Vasquez says to the officer.

"All of a sudden ... the car didn't see it, I couldn't see it," she says. "I know I hit her.''

Uber said Friday that interacting with any mobile device, including smart watches, while operating one of its vehicles on a public road is a fireable offense, and that policy is made clear to employees in training and through workplace posters.

In light of the accident, the company plans to bolster its safety training, the company said.

“We have a strict policy prohibiting mobile device usage for anyone operating our self-driving vehicles," a company spokesperson said in a written statement. "We plan to share more on the changes we’ll make to our program soon.”

Vasquez was let go from the company along with all the other autonomous drivers in Arizona when Uber decided to end its tests here in May, the company official said.

Vasquez was trained and expected to remain attentive to take control of the vehicle and avoid a collision, according to the company.

"Our system is a developmental self-driving system, which requires the close attention of a human operator at all times," Uber's spokesperson said. "Our operators are expected to maintain attentiveness to the road ahead and react when the system fails to do so, and are trained to uphold this responsibility."

Vasquez was given a field test and police initially determined she was not impaired. A few days after the crash, police obtained a search warrant for Vasquez's two cellphones and served warrants on three companies that provide streaming services — Hulu, Netflix and Google, which owns YouTube — in an effort to determine if the driver had been watching shows on her phones while driving.

One of those providers, Hulu, later provided a record of usage on one of Vasquez's phones that showed she was watching "The Voice,'' a talent competition show on NBC, right before the collision. The Hulu record showed her streaming ended at 21:59 hours — or 9:59 p.m.

The crash occurred at 10 p.m., according to records.

Tempe police, in the report, reviewed video from inside the Volvo XC90 — some of which previously was made public — that showed Vasquez looking down moments before the crash.

“She appears to be looking down at the area near her right knee at various points in the video,'' the report says. "Sometimes, her face appears to react and show a smirk or laugh at various points during the times that she is looking down. Her hands are not visible in the frame of the video during these times.’’

The report details an exhaustive analysis of data from the vehicle and re-enacting the crash at the site.

The analysis showed that nine video segments from dashboard cameras in the vehicle covered 11.8 miles prior to the crash. During that distance, Vasquez looked down 204 times toward her right knee, the report says. Of the nearly 22 minutes that elapsed during that distance, Vasquez was looking down for 6 minutes and 47 seconds.

"This crash would not have occurred if Vasquez would have been monitoring the vehicle and roadway conditions and was not distracted,'' the report says.

Tempe police referred the case to the Maricopa County Attorney's Office for possible charges. Police initially said the county attorney would determine when the report could be released.

The Maricopa County Attorney's Office referred the case to the Yavapai County Attorney's Office after citing a possible conflict of interest.

READ MORE: County attorney cites conflict in Uber case

An official with the Yavapai County Attorney's Office told The Arizona Republic Friday that a review of the case is underway. They declined to provide an estimated completion date.

A crash report indicated that the self-driving vehicle was traveling too fast for the road conditions.

It also noted that the roads were dry and level, and that there was no apparent medical condition that would have affected the driver at the time of the collision.

The report says Vasquez initially told police she had her hands "hovering'' in front of the steering wheel preparing to take over control of the vehicle. However, police noted that videos from the car show her hands were not visible.

OPINION: Roberts: Why was Arizona clueless about Uber?

The report concludes that, while Herzberg was not in a crosswalk when hit, Vasquez was "inattentive,'' failed to take control of the vehicle to avoid the crash and that her "disregard for assigned job function to intervene in a hazardous situation'' all contributed to the crash.

A report released by the National Transportation Safety Board on the crash last month showed that the emergency braking system on the car had been disabled, in part to reduce the jerkiness of the ride. That report also said toxicology reports found Herzberg had methamphetamine and marijuana in her system.

The police report released late Thursday indicated Uber company officials were consulted early on in the investigation. One video released from a police body camera shows a police sergeant talking to company representatives at the scene.

"You guys know as well as I do that this is going to be, like, an international story,'' he says. "We want to make sure we not only do what we normally do, not do anything different, but also make sure that everything is aboveboard.''

The officer added that "we hope you guys do the same,'' noting the two parties were "going to be working together.''

Staff writers Ryan Randazzo and Bree Burkitt contributed to this article.

READ MORE:. Police in Tempe, Arizona, have released a new report regarding Uber’s fatal self-driving car crash last March, which reveals that the safety driver Rafaela Vasquez was streaming The Voice on Hulu on her phone at the time of the accident, via Reuters.

The crash killed 49-year old Elaine Herzberg, who was crossing the street with a bicycle when Uber’s self-driving test car struck her at 39 mph. Why the car failed to avoid her has been the subject of scrutiny from both officials and the wider industry. The Tempe Police Department’s 318-page report of its investigation of the incident found that Vasquez’s Hulu account was watching the show for 42 minutes prior to the crash, right up until the time the accident occurred. According to the National Transportation Safety Board’s (NTSB) timeline of the crash, that means that Vasquez would have started watching her show within minutes of starting the drive.

The report claims that the crash was “entirely avoidable”

The report claims that the crash was “entirely avoidable” had Vasquez been paying more attention. Vasquez could face charges of vehicular manslaughter, although police haven’t said whether or not she will be charged yet.

In a video of the crash released by police officers, Vasquez can be seen looking down in front of her for several seconds before the crash. Vasquez had previously told investigators from the NTSB that she had been “monitoring the self-driving system interface,” which is displayed on an iPad mounted on the vehicle’s center console, at the time of the crash. She also said that both her personal and business phones were with her in the vehicle, but neither was in use until after the crash.

Uber says that in the past it didn’t monitor its safety drivers in real time, although it did perform spot checks to try and make sure they were following the rules. It also says a handful of drivers were previously fired for using a cell phone while operating test cars, though it didn’t say exactly how many. In a statement released to The Verge, an Uber spokesperson commented that “We continue to cooperate fully with ongoing investigations while conducting our own internal safety review. We have a strict policy prohibiting mobile device usage for anyone operating our self-driving vehicles. We plan to share more on the changes we’ll make to our program soon.”. . Police in Tempe, Arizona said evidence showed the "safety" driver behind the wheel of a self-driving Uber was distracted and streaming a television show on her phone right up until about the time of a fatal accident in March, deeming the crash that rocked the nascent industry "entirely avoidable."

A 318-page report from the Tempe Police Department, released late on Thursday in response to a public records request, said the driver, Rafaela Vasquez, repeatedly looked down and not at the road, glancing up just a half second before the car hit 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg, who was crossing the street at night.

According to the report, Vasquez could face charges of vehicle manslaughter. Police said that, based on testing, the crash was "deemed entirely avoidable" if Vasquez had been paying attention.

Police obtained records from Hulu, an online service for streaming television shows and movies, which showed Vasquez's account was playing the television talent show "The Voice" the night of the crash for about 42 minutes, ending at 9:59 p.m., which "coincides with the approximate time of the collision," the report says.

It is not clear if Vasquez will be charged, and police submitted their findings to county prosecutors, who will make the determination. The Maricopa County Attorney's Office referred the case to the Yavapai County Attorney's office because of a conflict and that office could not be reached late Thursday.

Vasquez could not immediately be reached for comment and Reuters could not locate her attorney.

The Uber car was in autonomous mode at the time of the crash, but Uber, like other self-driving car developers, requires a back-up driver in the car to intervene when the autonomous system fails or a tricky driving situation occurs.

Vasquez looked up just 0.5 seconds before the crash, after keeping her head down for 5.3 seconds, the Tempe Police report said. Uber's self-driving Volvo SUV was traveling at just under 44 miles-per-hour.

Uber declined to comment.

Last month, an Uber spokeswoman said the company was undergoing a "top-to-bottom safety review," and had brought on a former federal transportation official to help improve the company's safety culture. The company prohibits the use of any mobile device by safety drivers while the self-driving cars are on a public road, and drivers are told they can be fired for violating this rule.

Police said a review of video from inside the car showed Vasquez was looking down during the trip, and her face "appears to react and show a smirk or laugh at various points during the times that she is looking down." The report found that Vasquez "was distracted and looking down" for close to seven of the nearly 22 minutes prior to the collision.

Tempe Police Detective Michael McCormick asked Hulu for help in the investigation, writing in a May 10 email to the company that "this is a very serious case where the charges of vehicle manslaughter may be charged, so correctly interpreting the information provided to us is crucial." Hulu turned over the records on May 31.

According to a report last month by the National Transportation Safety Board, which is also investigating the crash, Vasquez told federal investigators she had been monitoring the self-driving interface in the car and that neither her personal nor business phones were in use until after the crash. That report showed Uber had disabled the emergency braking system in the Volvo, and Vasquez began braking less than a second after hitting Herzberg.

Herzberg, who was homeless, was walking her bicycle across the street, outside of a crosswalk on a four-lane road, the night of March 18 when she was struck by the front right side of the Volvo.

The police report faulted Herzberg for "unlawfully crossing the road at a location other than a marked crosswalk."

In addition to the report, police released on Thursday a slew of audio files of 911 calls made by Vasquez, who waited at the scene for police, and bystanders the night of the crash; photographs of Herzberg's damaged bicycle and the Uber car; and videos from police officers' body cameras that capture the minutes after the crash, including harrowing screams in the background.

The crash dealt Uber a major setback in its efforts to develop self-driving cars, and the company shuttered its autonomous car testing program in Arizona after the incident. It says it plans to begin testing elsewhere this summer, although in some cities it will have to first win over increasingly wary regulators.. . The fatal crash that killed pedestrian Elaine Herzberg in Tempe, Arizona, in March occurred because of a software bug in Uber's self-driving car technology, The Information's Amir Efrati reported on Monday. According to two anonymous sources who talked to Efrati, Uber's sensors did, in fact, detect Herzberg as she crossed the street with her bicycle. Unfortunately, the software classified her as a "false positive" and decided it didn't need to stop for her.

Distinguishing between real objects and illusory ones is one of the most basic challenges of developing self-driving car software. Software needs to detect objects like cars, pedestrians, and large rocks in its path and stop or swerve to avoid them. However, there may be other objects—like a plastic bag in the road or a trash can on the sidewalk—that a car can safely ignore. Sensor anomalies may also cause software to detect apparent objects where no objects actually exist.

Software designers face a basic tradeoff here. If the software is programmed to be too cautious, the ride will be slow and jerky, as the car constantly slows down for objects that pose no threat to the car or aren't there at all. Tuning the software in the opposite direction will produce a smooth ride most of the time—but at the risk that the software will occasionally ignore a real object. According to Efrati, that's what happened in Tempe in March—and unfortunately the "real object" was a human being.

Advertisement

"There's a reason Uber would tune its system to be less cautious about objects around the car," Efrati wrote. "It is trying to develop a self-driving car that is comfortable to ride in."

"Uber had been racing to meet an end-of-year internal goal of allowing customers in the Phoenix area to ride in Uber’s autonomous Volvo vehicles with no safety driver sitting behind the wheel," Efrati added.

The more cautiously a car's software is programmed, the more often it will slam on its brakes unnecessarily. That will produce a safer ride but also one that's not as comfortable for passengers.

This provides some useful context for Efrati's March report that cars from Cruise, GM's self-driving car subsidiary, "frequently swerve and hesitate." He wrote that Cruise cars "sometimes slow down or stop if they see a bush on the side of a street or a lane-dividing pole, mistaking it for an object in their path."

You could read that as a sign that Cruise's software isn't very good. But you could also view it as a sign that Cruise's engineers are being appropriately cautious. It's obviously much better for software to produce a jerky, erratic ride than to provide a smooth ride that occasionally runs over a pedestrian. And such caution is especially warranted when you're testing in a busy urban environment like San Francisco.

Of course, the long-term goal is for self-driving cars to become so good at recognizing objects that false positives and false negatives both become rare. But Herzberg's death provides a tragic reminder that companies shouldn't get too far ahead of themselves. Getting fully self-driving cars on the road is a worthwhile goal. But making sure that's done safely is more important.

Uber declined to comment to The Information, citing confidentiality requirements related to an ongoing investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board. We've asked Uber for comment and will update if the company responds.. ARIZONA (BLOOMBERG) - The backup "safety driver" in an Uber Technologies self-driving vehicle that killed a pedestrian in March was streaming the popular television show The Voice on her mobile phone in the moments before the crash, according to police in Arizona.

A 318-page report filed by the Tempe Police Department refutes driver Rafaela Vasquez's previous statement to federal safety investigators that she wasn't using her mobile devices when the car struck and killed a woman who was crossing the street at night.

Police were able to obtain records of Vasquez's account from the television streaming service Hulu LLC, which showed she'd streamed the talent show for 42 minutes on the night of the March 18 crash. Her stream ended at 9.59pm, around the same time Elaine Herzberg, 49, was hit by the Uber, which was in self-driving mode, the report said.

Police concluded in the report that the crash was "entirely avoidable" and said Vasquez could face vehicular manslaughter charges.

Emergency Braking Sensors on the Uber Volvo SUV's system had detected Herzberg six seconds before the impact and recognized that it was going to crash 1.3 seconds prior, according to a preliminary report by the National Transportation Safety Board. But the system couldn't activate the brakes because, according to Uber, emergency braking isn't enabled while the vehicle is under computer control, the report said. The responsibility for braking was left up to Vasquez - who didn't look up until 0.5 seconds before the accident.

Vasquez was looking away from the road for long stretches in the time before the crash, according to an internal video showing her that was released by police. She told NTSB investigators she was monitoring the self-driving system's interface. Vasquez couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

A spokesperson for Uber said the company continues to cooperate fully with ongoing investigations while conducting our own internal safety review, adding that Uber policy prohibits mobile device usage for anyone operating its self-driving vehicles.. Uber has reportedly found that a software problem likely caused a fatal accident involving one of its self-driving cars in Tempe, Arizona in March. That software is meant to determine how the car should react to detected objects, two people familiar with the matter told The Information.

Although the car's sensors reportedly detected the pedestrian, Uber's software determined that it didn't need to immediately react because of how it was tuned.

The software is supposed to ignore what are known as "false positives," or objects that wouldn't be an issue for the vehicle, like a plastic bag or piece of paper. Company executives told The Information that they believe the system was tuned in a way that made it react less to these objects -- meaning it reportedly didn't react fast enough when the pedestrian crossed the street.

During the collision, an operator was behind the wheel but the car was in autonomous mode. The operator was not looking at the road the moments before the car hit 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg at around 40 mph. Uber settled with the victim's family later that month. This was the first known fatality from an autonomous vehicle accident on a public road.

For now, Uber has temporarily halted its self-driving operations in all cities where it's been testing its vehicles, including Tempe, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto.

An Uber spokeswoman said the company has initiated a top-to-bottom safety review of its autonomous vehicle program and hired the former chair of the US National Transportation Safety Board, Christopher Hart, to advise the company on its overall safety culture.

"Our review is looking at everything from the safety of our system to our training processes for vehicle operators," the spokeswoman said.

Meanwhile, the Tempe police are working with Uber representatives, the NTSB and the US Department of Transportation's National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in their investigation to determine who, or what, was at fault for the accident. Uber declined to say whether the tuned-down software was responsible for the crash.

"We're actively cooperating with the NTSB in their investigation," the Uber spokeswoman said. "Out of respect for that process and the trust we've built with NTSB, we can't comment on the specifics of the incident."

First published May 7 at 11:29 a.m. PT.

Update, 11:40 a.m. PT: Adds background on the crash.. Uber has reached a settlement agreement with the family of the woman killed by an autonomous vehicle being tested by the ride-hailing company, according to Reuters.

Cristina Perez Hesano, an attorney with Bellah Perez, told the news agency that "the matter has been resolved." The terms of the agreement weren't revealed.

An Uber spokesperson declined to comment. Bellah Perez didn't immediately respond to a request for comment,

Uber's self-driving vehicle testing program has come under intense scrutiny since an accident in Tempe, Arizona, on March 18 resulted in the first fatality of a pedestrian from a car in full autonomous mode. A dashcam video of the incident released by Tempe police shows 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg walking her bike loaded with bags across a dark road.

The video, which stops at the moment of impact, also shows the vehicle operator, Rafaela Vasquez, sitting at the wheel constantly glancing down at her lap. She looks up just as the car collides with Herzberg, who was pronounced dead by the time she reached the hospital.

Arizona Gov. Doug Duccey said earlier this week he's suspending Uber's ability to test self-driving cars on the state's roads, saying he found video of the deadly collision "disturbing and alarming."

The Tempe police are working with Uber representatives, the National Transportation Safety Board and the US Department of Transportation's National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in their investigation to determine who, or what, was at fault for the accident.

iHate: CNET looks at how intolerance is taking over the internet.

Special Reports: CNET's in-depth features in one place.. Sunday marked a turning point for self-driving cars. For the first time, a car in full autonomous mode struck and killed a pedestrian.

It happened at 10 p.m. in Tempe, Arizona, where ride-hailing company Uber had been picking up passengers in autonomous vehicles for more than a year.

Elaine Herzberg, 49, was walking her bicycle down a four-lane road and was starting to cross when the gray Volvo, operated by Uber, hit her at about 40 mph, according to local police. It's believed Herzberg was homeless. She was pronounced dead by the time she reached the hospital.

Although the car was driving itself, Uber vehicle operator Rafaela Vasquez, 44, was behind the wheel.

"Our investigation did not show at this time that there were significant signs of the vehicle slowing down," Tempe Police Sgt. Roland Elcock said in a press conference Monday. The police are "going to attempt to find who was at fault and how we can better be safe," he added.

The Tempe police on Wednesday released a video of the collision. It shows footage of Herzberg crossing the road outside the vehicle and of Vasquez at the moment of impact. It's graphic and difficult to watch.

"The video is disturbing and heartbreaking to watch, and our thoughts continue to be with Elaine's loved ones," an Uber spokeswoman said in an emailed statement Wednesday. "Our cars remain grounded, and we're assisting local, state and federal authorities in any way we can."

Almost every automaker in the world -- including General Motors, BMW, Ford, Tesla Motors and Toyota -- has plans to offer self-driving cars in the next few years. Several Silicon Valley giants such as Intel and Google have invested years in developing the technologies as well. The promise: greater safety, since such vehicles use software and sensors that let them "see" and react to their surroundings supposedly faster than humans can.

Read: Levels of self-driving cars

National Transportation Safety Board investigators in Tempe, Arizona, examine the Uber vehicle involved in Sunday's fatal accident. National Transportation Safety Board

Earlier this month, Uber also began regular operation of self-driving trucks hauling cargo in Arizona, after it wrapped up its testing period. The trucks always have a safety operator who's a licensed truck driver.

For the most part, testing of the technology has shown the cars to be safe. But autonomous technology is still a work in progress. The vast majority of car tests haven't been done on public roads, and the cars are still learning how to drive. Sunday's fatality has some people questioning if the cars belong on public roads at all.

"This is their vehicle, they put it on the road, and they're responsible for making sure it's safe," said consumer attorney Neama Rahmani, who isn't involved with any of the legal proceedings regarding the accident. "Uber needs to not implement any of this until it's fully vetted and tested and 100 percent safe."

Safety first

This wasn't the first time a self-driving car has been involved in a collision.

Google reported an accident with one of its cars in March 2016, and there have been at least three crashes involving Teslas in autopilot mode, one of which was fatal -- though Tesla warns owners that autopilot isn't fully autonomous. One of Uber's vehicles was involved in another crash in Tempe last year, but no serious injuries were reported. And just last week, an Uber self-driving car in Pittsburgh was in a collision with another car.

Uber's cars have also had some other near misses in Pittsburgh, including reports of fender-benders going the wrong way down one-way streets and ignoring traffic signals, according to Quartz. No injuries have been reported.

Within hours of Uber launching its autonomous vehicles in San Francisco in December 2016, one ran a red light. A dashboard camera video of the incident, captured by a Luxor Cab taxi, shows a self-driving Volvo SUV zooming through the light long after it turned red and coming uncomfortably close to a pedestrian.

"Sadly, this is a reminder of the risk that comes with rushing to get more and more self-driving cars on public roads before we know they are safe," said David Friedman, director of cars for Consumers Union, which is the advocacy division of Consumer Reports. "The promise of self-driving cars is that they can avoid fatalities, but this tragedy makes clear they have a long way to go."

What now?

After Sunday's fatality, some regulators are starting to question whether driverless cars are ready for public roads. Both the National Transportation Safety Board and the US Department of Transportation's National Highway Traffic Safety Administration confirmed they've sent teams to Tempe to investigate the collision alongside the local police department.

"The investigation will address the vehicle's interaction with the environment, other vehicles and vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and bicyclists," the National Transportation Safety Board said in a statement.

The Tempe Police Department would like to reaffirm that fault has not been determined in this case. Ronald Elcock, Tempe Police Sergeant

The NHTSA said that, along with dispatching its Special Crash Investigation team, it's also in contact with Uber and Volvo, and with federal, state and local authorities, about the incident.

Democratic Sen. Edward Markey of Massachusetts has also issued a statement saying he's committed to working with the Senate on creating autonomous vehicle legislation that includes safety protections.

"This tragic accident underscores why we need to be exceptionally cautious when testing and deploying autonomous vehicle technologies on public roads," said Markey. "If these technologies are to reap their purported safety, efficiency, and environmental benefits, we must have robust safety, cybersecurity, and privacy rules in place."

Tempe police said that both Uber and its driver are cooperating fully with the investigation, which is still in its beginning stages. Once they're done they'll submit the investigation to the County Attorney's Office to determine if criminal charges are warranted.

Initially, Tempe Police Chief Sylvia Moir said it would've been difficult to avoid Herzberg because she was emerging from the shadows, according to the San Francisco Chronicle.

From viewing the videos, Moir said, "It's very clear it would have been difficult to avoid this collision in any kind of mode (autonomous or human-driven) based on how she came from the shadows right into the roadway."

However, Tempe police released a statement Tuesday evening saying it has yet to pinpoint responsibility for the collision.

"Chief Moir and the Tempe Police Department would like to reaffirm that fault has not been determined in this case," Sergeant Elcock said in the statement. They added that the investigation will look into driver interaction with the vehicle and opportunities for the vehicle or driver to detect Herzberg before she was struck.

Uber, best known for its ride-hailing service, has temporarily halted its self-driving operations in all cities where it's been testing its vehicles, including Tempe, Phoenix, Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto. Toyota has followed suit and also put a pause on its driverless car program on public roads because of the fatality, said a company spokesman.

In a tweet Monday, Uber's CEO Dara Khosrowshahi said the company is thinking of the victim's family and it will do what it can to help the police figure out what happened. Tempe's mayor, Mark Mitchell, echoed that sentiment and said it's of utmost importance to keep the city's public roads safe.

"I support the step that Uber has taken to temporarily suspend testing in Tempe until this event is fully examined and understood," Mitchell said in a statement. "That is a responsible step to take at this time."

First published March 20, 12:05 p.m. PT.

Update, 3:25 p.m.: Adds comment from Sen. Edward Markey and information on Toyota temporarily halting its driverless car program on public roads.

Update, 6:41 p.m.: Adds statement from Tempe Police Department.

Update, March 21, 5:49 p.m.: Adds information on Tempe Police Department releasing the video of the collision and a statement from an Uber spokeswoman.

The Smartest Stuff: Innovators are thinking up new ways to make you, and the things around you, smarter.

Blockchain Decoded: CNET looks at the tech powering bitcoin -- and soon, too, a myriad of services that will change your life.. A woman was struck and killed by one of Uber's self-driving cars in Tempe, Arizona, late Sunday night. This is the first known fatality from an autonomous vehicle accident on a public road.

At the time of the collision, 10 p.m., a vehicle operator was behind the wheel but the car was in autonomous mode, according to Tempe police. No passengers were in the car.

"The vehicle was traveling northbound just south of Curry Road when a female walking outside of the crosswalk crossed the road from west to east when she was struck by the Uber vehicle," the Tempe police said in a statement. "She was transported to a local area hospital where she passed away from her injuries."

The police said Uber is assisting in the still-active investigation. The ride-hailing company has also confirmed that it's temporarily halted its self-driving car operations in all other cities where it's been testing its vehicles, including Phoenix, Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto.

"Our hearts go out to the victim's family," an Uber spokeswoman said in a statement. "We are fully cooperating with local authorities in their investigation of this incident."

Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi also tweeted his condolences on Monday morning,

"Some incredibly sad news out of Arizona," he said. "We're thinking of the victim's family as we work with local law enforcement to understand what happened."

Watch this: Self-driving Uber kills pedestrian 01:01

Given how the woman suddenly emerged from the shadows and walked in front of the car, Tempe Police Chief Sylvia Moir said Uber may not have been at fault. Moir was able to look at the video feed from the cameras mounted in the car.

From viewing the videos, "it's very clear it would have been difficult to avoid this collision in any kind of mode (autonomous or human-driven) based on how she came from the shadows right into the roadway," Moir said in an interview with the San Francisco Chronicle.

Initially, the crash was thought to have been between a bicyclist and the Uber car, according to a report by TV station ABC15, which first reported the accident. But the woman was actually walking the bicycle, according to Tempe police.

Most companies working on self-driving cars tout the vehicles as a potentially safer alternative to human drivers. And, for the most part, testing of the technology has shown the cars to be safe. However, this isn't the first time an autonomous vehicle has been involved in a collision.

Google reported an accident with one of its self-driving cars in March 2016 and there have been at least three crashes involving Teslas in autopilot mode, one of which was fatal. Just last week, an Uber self-driving car in Pittsburgh was involved in a collision with another car. In that accident, no injuries were reported but both vehicles had serious damage.

First published March 19 at 9:07 a.m. PT.

Update, 10:36 a.m. PT: Adds that the victim was a pedestrian, not a bicyclist as initially reported.

Update, 11:07 a.m. PT: Adds comment from Tempe police, Uber spokeswoman and additional background information.

Update, 12:10 p.m. PT: Adds additional background information.

Update, 3:51 p.m. PT: Adds that the crash took place at 10 p.m. Sunday, not early Monday as was initially reported.

Update, March 20 at 7:45 a.m. PT: Adds comments from the Tempe, Arizona, police chief.

The Smartest Stuff: Innovators are thinking up new ways to make you, and the things around you, smarter.

Blockchain Decoded: CNET looks at the tech powering bitcoin -- and soon, too, a myriad of services that will change your life.. Tempe Police have released new body camera video and the police report from the night of March 19, when a self-driving Uber hit and killed a pedestrian mid-block on Mill Avenue. The backup driver was streaming the TV show "The Voice" before fatally striking the pedestrian, the police report said.

The case has now been handed over to the Yavapai County Attorney for review of possible charges against the backup driver, Rafaela Vasquez. The Maricopa County Attorney's Office was originally given the case, but handed it over to Yavapai because of a "conflict of interest."

Vasquez was still in the driver's seat of the Uber when she was questioned by officers.

"Are you alright?" an officer asked.

"Yeah," Vasquez said. "I'm just shaken up."

Vasquez is seen giving the officers her license and insurance and asked about the victim.

"Is the person OK?" Vasquez asked.

The pedestrian, Elaine Herzberg, was killed in the collision. New pictures show her bike left behind and a big dent on the right front end of the Uber.

"So what exactly happened?" an officer asked.

"The car was in auto-drive and all of a sudden, I didn't see it," Vasquez said. "The car didn't see it. And all of a sudden it was just there. Shot out in front and I know I hit them."

In a separate video released by Uber in March, Vasquez is seen looking down for a few seconds at a time. But it's unclear if it has something to do with the program.

According to a police report, investigators noted Vazquez looking down and to her right side multiple times. Before the collision occurred, Vasquez's eyes were averted from the roadway for approximately 5.3 seconds.

"Sometimes, her face appears to react and show a smirk or laugh at various points during the times that she is looking down," the report said. "Her hands are not visible in the frame of the video during these times."

Officers calculated that had Vasquez been paying attention, she could have reacted 143 feet before impact and brought the SUV to a stop about 42.6 feet before hitting Herzberg.

"This crash would not have occurred if Vasquez would have been monitoring the vehicle and roadway conditions and was not distracted," the report stated.

After the crash, Vasquez was given a field sobriety test.

"Your internal clock is a little slow, but not anything alarming," the officer is heard saying.

"I'm sick over what happened," Vasquez told the officer.

The Tempe police report says Vasquez had a “disregard for assigned job function to intervene in a hazardous situation” and the crash may have been avoided if she was watching the road.

She told officers she "slammed" on the brakes immediately after hitting the woman but Herzberg "came out of nowhere and she didn't see her," the police report said.

In the police report, the investigator explained there were no skid marks or antilock brake marks from the autonomous vehicle that would have indicated "dynamic braking" prior to the crash.

The report also says Herzberg unlawfully crossing the road at an unmarked location was a factor in the crash.

After the crash occurred, officers attempted to locate Vasquez at her Phoenix home but were unsuccessful. She was later found in Tucson and her personal and work cell phones were seized as evidence.

As part of the investigation, Tempe police reached out to YouTube, Netflix and Hulu for the video viewing history of both cell phones. Netflix was the first to respond, saying there was no activity during the specified time period on either phones.

On May 31, Hulu responded saying the most accurate way to measure playback times is to look at player "heartbeats."

It was discovered based on Hulu's heartbeat data that a user on Vasquez's account was watching an episode of "The Voice" during the time of the collision. However, the heartbeats were not consistent, meaning the user may have paused the player, switched apps, experienced buffering issues or lost service.

Uber has since shut down their self-driving program in the Valley. The victim's family reached a settlement with Uber.

The detective seeking the warrant, identified as J. Barutha, wrote that based on information from the vehicular homicide unit, "it is believed that the crime of vehicular manslaughter has occurred and that evidence of this offense is currently located in a 2017 Grey Volvo XC-90."

The National Transportation Safety Board, in a preliminary report issued last month, said the autonomous driving system on Uber's Volvo XC-90 SUV spotted Herzberg about six seconds before hitting her, but did not stop because the system used to automatically apply brakes in potentially dangerous situations had been disabled.

RELATED:Uber announces more security for riders, including abilityto dial 911 from the app

The system is disabled while Uber's cars are under computer control, "to reduce the potential for erratic vehicle behavior," the NTSB report said. Instead of the system, Uber relies on the human backup driver to intervene, the report stated. But the system is not designed to alert the driver.

An Uber spokeswoman said in a prepared statement Friday morning that any use of a mobile device by a backup driver while a vehicle is moving is a fireable offense. "This is emphasized during training and on an ongoing basis," the statement said.

The Yavapai County Attorney does not have a projected time line for a decision in the case.

RELATED: Uber and Lyft drivers willing to drive children without car seats, investigation shows

After the crash, the ride-hailing company said it did a top-to-bottom safety evaluation, reviewing internal processes and safety culture. Uber also said it brought in former transportation safety board chairman Christopher Hart to advise the company on safety.. The crash of an Uber self-driving car that killed an Arizona woman in March was “entirely avoidable,” according to police reports released by the Tempe Police Department. Cellphone data obtained by police suggests that the Uber operator was also streaming an episode of reality show The Voice at the time of the fatal incident.

The documents, released to Gizmodo in response to a public records request, show that Tempe police found that the operator of the Uber autonomous vehicle could likely have avoided the fatal crash, had she been paying attention—but instead she was likely watching a video on her phone. Police also noted that Uber’s vehicles apparently did not alert operators to take over the vehicle during incidents.

Advertisement

After the crash, Uber laid off 300 test drivers from its autonomous vehicle unit and halted testing in Arizona. An Uber spokesperson noted that using any device behind the wheel, even a smartwatch, would be considered a fireable offense.

Advertisement

The crash killed Elaine Herzberg, a 49-year-old woman who was walking across the street with a bicycle when she was struck by the Uber vehicle. Uber’s autonomous technology failed to detect Herzberg, and the human driver who was supposed to act as a safeguard appeared distracted in previously released footage. Now, several documents in the 318-page report suggest the driver, Rafaela Vasquez, may have been streaming an episode of The Voice at the time of the crash.

Advertisement

“The driver in this case could have reacted and brought the vehicle to a stop 42.61 feet prior to the pedestrian,” one of the documents concluded.

However, Tempe police also noted that Uber’s vehicles did not alert autonomous vehicle operators about when to take control of their cars.

Advertisement

“During the current development phase, vehicle operators are relied upon to perform evasive maneuvers,” one Tempe detective wrote. “I was not able to find anywhere in the literature that the self-driving systems alerts the vehicle operator to potential hazards or when they should take manual control of the vehicle to perform an evasive maneuver.” Uber’s spokesperson said that the company is reviewing safety practices and procedures and has hired former National Transportation Safety Board chair Christopher Hart as a safety advisor.

In a statement, an Uber spokesperson said the company’s policy prohibits drivers of its autonomous vehicles from using mobile devices while behind the wheel.

Advertisement

“We continue to cooperate fully with ongoing investigations while conducting our own internal safety review. We have a strict policy prohibiting mobile device usage for anyone operating our self-driving vehicles,” the spokesperson told Gizmodo. “We plan to share more on the changes we’ll make to our program soon.”

Following the crash, police obtained warrants for work and personal cellphones belonging to Vasquez. Police also sent search warrants to YouTube, Netflix, and Hulu to recover Vasquez’s viewing history on her devices around the time of the accident.

Advertisement

“The driver in this case could have reacted and brought the vehicle to a stop 42.61 feet prior to the pedestrian.”

The crash occurred around 10pm—more specifically, the report states that video from inside the car “ceases recording with a UTC time of 4:58:50 [9:58pm local time], just moments after striking the pedestrian.”

Advertisement

The data Hulu provided to authorities shows Vasquez was streaming an episode of The Voice called “The Blind Auditions, Part 5" between 9:16pm and 9:59pm local time, according to account history turned over to the police by Hulu’s legal team. In response to the warrants, YouTube and Netflix said that Vasquez was not actively viewing video on either platform at the time of the crash.

Advertisement

Hulu’s legal team initially released viewing data for another user’s account, according to the police reports, then corrected the error in response to follow-up questions from the Tempe police and released Vasquez’s data.



In reviewing footage collected from Uber’s own cameras, which filmed the car’s view of the road and Vasquez as she was driving, police determined that Vasquez was frequently distracted.

Advertisement

“She appears to be looking down at the area near her right knee at various points in the video,” the report reads. “During the 9 video clips, I found that the driver looked down 204 times with nearly all of them having the same eye placement at the lower center console near her right knee. One hundred sixty-six of these instances of looking down occurred while the vehicle was in motion.” Vasquez was appeared to laugh or smirk during moments when she was looking towards her knee, the report added.

Police didn’t just note the number of instances her eyes were off the road, they also focused on the aggregate amount of time that Vasquez was apparently distracted. “The vehicle was in motion for 21 minutes, 48 seconds. Of that time, the total amount of time the driver’s eyes were averted from the roadway was 6 minutes, 47.2 seconds, or approximately 32% of the time,” police found.

Advertisement

However, Vasquez did call 911 after the crash occurred. She also passed a field sobriety test. Approximately half an hour into the test, the officer administering it reassured Vasquez that she was unlikely to face criminal charges, according to the officer’s bodycam video.

Advertisement

Vasquez was alone in the vehicle the night of the collision—a standard practice for Uber’s autonomous vehicle operators. Several other autonomous vehicle companies have opted to have two operators in their cars while testing. This was Uber’s practice when it started testing, CityLab reported, but the company switched to single operators in late 2017. An Uber spokesperson told CityLab at the time that the second operator had been present strictly to take notes and was not expected to maintain safety.

However, a co-driver might have noticed Herzberg walking into the road. In bodycam footage following the crash, an officer who spoke to Vasquez asked about the two-person policy. “Did you have a passenger? Because I know sometimes you guys ride two people together,” the officer asks.

Advertisement

In a preliminary report released late last month, the National Transportation Safety Board found that Uber’s vehicle detected Herzberg a mere six seconds before the crash, and initiated emergency braking 1.3 seconds before impact. Uber’s system is not designed to alert the operator of a potential hazard, the NTSB report found. The NTSB’s investigation into the crash is ongoing and its final report has yet to be released.

Update 10:30am, June 22: Added statement on the police report from an Uber spokesperson.

Advertisement

Correction: A previous version of this story mistakenly stated that Uber did not train operators about vehicle takeover; that section of the police report refers to instructions provided by the vehicle itself rather than a training manual.. The person behind the wheel of the Uber self-driving Volvo SUV that struck and killed a woman in Arizona was likely streaming "The Voice" on a cellphone at the time of the incident.

The Tempe Police Department released a 318-page document late Thursday that sheds new light on what likely happened when the vehicle hit pedestrian Elaine Herzberg, 49, in March as she walked a bicycle across a road in Tempe. According to an analysis of the incident, police said "the crash was deemed entirely avoidable."

The test driver, Rafaela Vasquez, who was hired by Uber to sit behind the wheel and take over in case of emergencies, had both personal and business phones in the car at the time of the crash. Tempe Police Department's investigation requested data from Hulu, YouTube and Netflix as part of its investigation. The apps were found on one or both of Vasquez's phones.

According to data provided by Hulu, the driver was streaming NBC's popular show "The Voice" on the Hulu app for about 40 minutes. The end time coincides with the crash. Netflix and YouTube reportedly weren't in use.

Related: Uber shuts down self-driving operations in Arizona

During nine video segments obtained from the vehicle's dashcam, Vasquez looked down 204 times. The report states each of those times had "the same eye placement at the lower center console near the area of her right knee."

Vasquez's eyes were averted for a total of more than six minutes, or 3.67 miles out of 11.8 miles traveled during the trip. Vasquez had previously told National Transportation Safety Board investigators in a post-crash interview that the phones weren't in use.

Vasquez could face charges for vehicular manslaughter, according to Tempe Police Department.

Vasquez could not immediately be reached for comment.

Uber said it is cooperating with ongoing investigations and conducting its own internal safety review.

"We have a strict policy prohibiting mobile device usage for anyone operating our self-driving vehicles. We plan to share more on the changes we'll make to our program soon," according to an Uber spokesperson

The spokesperson added that any physical mobile device usage while the vehicle is on the road is a fireable offense.

The crash was a major setback for Uber's self-driving car operation. In May, Uber said it was ending self-driving car testing in Arizona and laying off 300 Uber workers. The company said it would focus on its autonomous vehicle efforts in San Francisco and Pittsburgh.

This is the latest development in the ongoing investigation into the fatal crash. In May, the National Transportation Safety Board determined Uber's self-driving car accurately identified Herzberg, but Uber had turned off the vehicle's automatic emergency braking, so the SUV did not attempt to brake. The feature was disabled to reduce the potential for unwanted braking, such as for a plastic bag in the road.

Earlier this year, Uber said it employs about 400 human safety drivers like Vasquez across various cities.

CNNMoney's Matt McFarland contributed to this report. THEY are one of the most talked-about topics in technology—but lately they have been for all the wrong reasons. A series of accidents involving self-driving cars has raised questions about the safety of these futuristic new vehicles, which are being tested on public roads in several American states. In March 2018 an experimental Uber vehicle, operating in autonomous mode, struck and killed a pedestrian in Tempe, Arizona—the first fatal accident of its kind. On May 24th America’s National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) issued its preliminary report into the crash. What caused the accident, and what does it say about the safety of autonomous vehicles (AVs) more broadly?

The computer systems that drive cars consist of three modules. The first is the perception module, which takes information from the car’s sensors and identifies relevant objects nearby. The Uber car, a modified Volvo XC90, was equipped with cameras, radar and LIDAR (a variant of radar that uses invisible pulses of light). Cameras can spot features such as lane markings, road signs and traffic lights. Radar measures the velocity of nearby objects. LIDAR determines the shape of the car’s surroundings in fine detail, even in the dark. The readings from these sensors are combined to build a model of the world, and machine-learning systems then identify nearby cars, bicycles, pedestrians and so on. The second module is the prediction module, which forecasts how each of those objects will behave in the next few seconds. Will that car change lane? Will that pedestrian step into the road? Finally, the third module uses these predictions to determine how the vehicle should respond (the so-called “driving policy”): speed up, slow down, or steer left or right.

Of these three modules, the most difficult to build is the perception module, says Sebastian Thrun, a Stanford professor who used to lead Google’s autonomous-vehicle effort. The hardest things to identify, he says, are rarely-seen items such as debris on the road, or plastic bags blowing across a highway. In the early days of Google’s AV project, he recalls, “our perception module could not distinguish a plastic bag from a flying child.” According to the NTSB report, the Uber vehicle struggled to identify Elaine Herzberg as she wheeled her bicycle across a four-lane road. Although it was dark, the car’s radar and LIDAR detected her six seconds before the crash. But the perception system got confused: it classified her as an unknown object, then as a vehicle and finally as a bicycle, whose path it could not predict. Just 1.3 seconds before impact, the self-driving system realised that emergency braking was needed. But the car’s built-in emergency braking system had been disabled, to prevent conflict with the self-driving system; instead a human safety operator in the vehicle is expected to brake when needed. But the safety operator, who had been looking down at the self-driving system’s display screen, failed to brake in time. Ms Herzberg was hit by the vehicle and subsequently died of her injuries.

The cause of the accident therefore has many elements, but is ultimately a system-design failure. When its perception module gets confused, an AV should slow down. But unexpected braking can cause problems of its own: confused AVs have in the past been rear-ended (by human drivers) after slowing suddenly. Hence the delegation of responsibility for braking to human safety drivers, who are there to catch the system when an accident seems imminent. In theory adding a safety driver to supervise an imperfect system ensures that the system is safe overall. But that only works if they are paying attention to the road at all times. Uber is now revisiting its procedures and has suspended all testing of its AVs; it is unclear when, or even if, it will be allowed to resume testing. Other AV-makers, having analysed video from the Tempe accident, say their systems would have braked to avoid a collision. In the long term, AVs promise to be much safer than ordinary cars, given that 94% of accidents are caused by driver error. But right now the onus is on Uber and AV-makers to reassure the public that they are doing everything they can to avoid accidents on the road to a safer future.

Dig deeper

What it’s like to ride in a self-driving Uber (Mar 2018)

Why self-driving cars will be mostly shared, not owned (Mar 2018)

Reinventing wheels: a special report on self-driving cars (Mar 2018). The first rule of safe flying: Pay attention, even when you think you don’t need to. According to a 1994 review by the National Transportation Safety Board, 31 of the 37 serious accidents that occurred on U.S. air carriers between 1978 and 1990 involved “inadequate monitoring.” Pilots, officers, and other crew members neglected to crosscheck instruments, confirm inputs, or speak up when they caught an error.

Over the period of that study, aviation had moved into the automation era, as Maria Konnikova reported for The New Yorker in 2014. Cockpit controls that once required constant vigilance now maintained themselves, only asking for human intervention on an as-needed basis. The idea was reduce the margin of error via the precision of machines, and that was the effect, in some respects. But as planes increasingly flew themselves, pilots became more complacent. The computers had introduced a new problem: the hazardous expectation that a human operator can take control of an automated machine in the moments before disaster when their attention isn’t otherwise much required.. An autonomous Uber car killed a woman in the street in Arizona, police said, in what appears to be the first reported fatal crash involving a self-driving vehicle and a pedestrian in the US.

Tempe police said the self-driving car was in autonomous mode at the time of the crash and that the vehicle hit a woman, who was walking outside of the crosswalk and later died at a hospital. There was a vehicle operator inside the car at the time of the crash.

Uber said in a statement on Twitter: “Our hearts go out to the victim’s family. We are fully cooperating with local authorities in their investigation of this incident.” A spokesman declined to comment further on the crash.

The company said it was pausing its self-driving car operations in Phoenix, Pittsburgh, San Francisco and Toronto. Dara Khosrowshahi, Uber’s CEO, tweeted: “Some incredibly sad news out of Arizona. We’re thinking of the victim’s family as we work with local law enforcement to understand what happened.”

Uber has been testing its self-driving cars in numerous states and temporarily suspended its vehicles in Arizona last year after a crash involving one of its vehicles, a Volvo SUV. When the company first began testing its self-driving cars in California in 2016, the vehicles were caught running red lights, leading to a high-profile dispute between state regulators and the San Francisco-based corporation.



Police identified the victim as 49-year-old Elaine Herzberg and said she was walking outside of the crosswalk with a bicycle when she was hit at around 10pm on Sunday. Images from the scene showed a damaged bike. The 2017 Volvo SUV was traveling at roughly 40 miles an hour, and it did not appear that the car slowed down as it approached the woman, said Tempe sergeant Ronald Elcock.

Elcock said he had watched footage of the collision, which has not been released to the public. Police identified the operator of the car as Rafaela Vasquez, 44, and said she was cooperative and there were no signs of impairment.

View image in fullscreen A still image taken from video provided by ABC-15 at the scene, where a pedestrian with a bicycle was hit. Photograph: AP

The self-driving technology is supposed to detect pedestrians, cyclists and others and prevent crashes.

John M Simpson, privacy and technology project director with Consumer Watchdog, said the collision highlighted the need for tighter regulations of the nascent technology.

“The robot cars cannot accurately predict human behavior, and the real problem comes in the interaction between humans and the robot vehicles,” said Simpson, whose advocacy group called for a national moratorium on autonomous car testing in the wake of the deadly collision.

Simpson said he was unaware of any previous fatal crashes involving an autonomous vehicle and a pedestrian.

Tesla Motors was the first to disclose a death involving a self-driving car in 2016 when the sensors of a Model S driving in autopilot mode failed to detect a large white 18-wheel truck and trailer crossing the highway. The car drove full speed under the trailer, causing the collision that killed the 40-year-old behind the wheel in the Tesla.

Earlier this year, California regulators approved the testing of self-driving cars on public roads without human drivers monitoring inside.

“The technology is not ready for it yet, and this just sadly proves it,” said Simpson.

In one recent incident, California police officers found a Tesla that was stopped in the middle of a five-lane highway and found a driver asleep behind the wheel. The man said the vehicle was in “autopilot”, which is Tesla’s semi-autonomous driver assist system, and he was arrested on suspicion of drunk driving.

View image in fullscreen An Uber self-driving car travels in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Photograph: Angelo Merendino/AFP/Getty Images

In another recent case, a Tesla car rear-ended a fire truck on a freeway, with the driver again telling the authorities the car was in autopilot mode at the time of the collision.

Michael G Bennett, an Arizona State University associate research professor who studies autonomous cars, said the self-driving vehicles have become ubiquitous around campus and on the streets in Tempe. Often they have operators behind the wheels, but sometimes they are fully autonomous with no human inside.

The fatal collision could spark significant calls for reform and reflections within the industry, he said.

“It may be problematic for the industry, because one of their central arguments for the value of the technology is that it is superior to human drivers,” said Bennett, adding that autonomous cars should