The COMPAS tool is widely used to assess a defendant’s risk of committing more crimes, but a new study puts its usefulness into perspective.

In February 2013, Eric Loomis was found driving a car that had been used in a shooting. He was arrested, and pleaded guilty to eluding an officer. In determining his sentence, a judge looked not just to his criminal record, but also to a score assigned by a tool called COMPAS.

Developed by a private company called Equivant (formerly Northpointe), COMPAS—or the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions—purports to predict a defendant’s risk of committing another crime. It works through a proprietary algorithm that considers some of the answers to a 137-item questionnaire.

COMPAS is one of several such risk-assessment algorithms being used around the country to predict hot spots of violent crime, determine the types of supervision that inmates might need, or—as in Loomis’s case—provide information that might be useful in sentencing. COMPAS classified him as high-risk of re-offending, and Loomis was sentenced to six years.

He appealed the ruling on the grounds that the judge, in considering the outcome of an algorithm whose inner workings were secretive and could not be examined, violated due process. The appeal went up to the Wisconsin Supreme Court, who ruled against Loomis, noting that the sentence would have been the same had COMPAS never been consulted. Their ruling, however, urged caution and skepticism in the algorithm’s use.

Caution is indeed warranted, according to Julia Dressel and Hany Farid from Dartmouth College. In a new study, they have shown that COMPAS is no better at predicting an individual’s risk of recidivism than random volunteers recruited from the internet.

“Imagine you’re a judge and your court has purchased this software; the people behind it say they have big data and algorithms, and their software says the defendant is high-risk,” says Farid. “Now imagine I said: Hey, I asked 20 random people online if this person will recidivate and they said yes. How would you weight those two pieces of data? I bet you’d weight them differently. But what we’ve shown should give the courts some pause.” (A spokesperson from Equivant declined a request for an interview.)

COMPAS has attracted controversy before. In 2016, the technology reporter Julia Angwin and colleagues at ProPublica analyzed COMPAS assessments for more than 7,000 arrestees in Broward County, Florida, and published an investigation claiming that the algorithm was biased against African Americans. The problems, they said, lay in the algorithm’s mistakes. “Blacks are almost twice as likely as whites to be labeled a higher risk but not actually re-offend,” the team wrote. And COMPAS “makes the opposite mistake among whites: They are much more likely than blacks to be labeled lower-risk but go on to commit other crimes.”

Northpointe questioned ProPublica’s analysis, as did various academics. They noted, among other rebuttals, that the program correctly predicted recidivism in both white and black defendants at similar rates. For any given score on COMPAS’s 10-point scale, white and black people are just as likely to re-offend as each other. Others have noted that this debate hinges on one’s definition of fairness, and that it’s mathematically impossible to satisfy the standards set by both Northpointe and ProPublica—a story at The Washington Post clearly explains why.

The debate continues, but when Dressel read about it, she realized that it masked a different problem. “There was this underlying assumption in the conversation that the algorithm’s predictions were inherently better than human ones,” she says, “but I couldn’t find any research proving that.” So she and Farid did their own.

They recruited 400 volunteers through a crowdsourcing site. Each person saw short descriptions of defendants from ProPublica’s investigation, highlighting seven pieces of information. Based on that, they had to guess if the defendant would commit another crime within two years.

On average, they got the right answer 63 percent of their time, and the group’s accuracy rose to 67 percent if their answers were pooled. COMPAS, by contrast, has an accuracy of 65 percent. It’s barely better than individual guessers, and no better than a crowd. “These are nonexperts, responding to an online survey with a fraction of the amount of information that the software has,” says Farid. “So what exactly is software like COMPAS doing?”

Only Equivant can say, and they’re not revealing the secrets of their algorithm. So the duo developed their own algorithm, and made it as simple as possible—“the kind of thing you teach undergrads in a machine-learning course,” says Farid. They found that this training-wheels algorithm could perform just as well as COMPAS, with an accuracy of 67 percent, even when using just two pieces of data—a defendant’s age, and their number of previous convictions. “If you are young and have a lot of prior convictions, you are high-risk,” says Farid. “It’s kind of obvious.”

Other teams have found similar results. Last year, a team of researchers led by Cynthia Rudin from Duke University showed that a basic set of rules based on a person’s age, sex, and prior convictions—essentially, an algorithm so simple you could write it on a business card—could predict recidivism as well as COMPAS.

The problem isn’t necessarily that COMPAS is unsophisticated, says Farid, but that it has hit a ceiling in sophistication. When he and Dressel designed more complicated algorithms, they never improved on the bare-bones version that used just age and prior convictions. “It suggests not that the algorithms aren’t sophisticated enough, but that there’s no signal,” he says. Maybe this is just as good as it gets. Maybe the whole concept of predicting recidivism is going to stall at odds that are not that much better than a coin toss.

Sharad Goel, from Stanford University, sees it a little differently. He notes that judges in the real world have access to far more information than the volunteers in Dressel and Farid’s study, including witness testimonies, statements from attorneys, and more. Paradoxically, that informational overload can lead to worse results by allowing human biases to kick in. Simple sets of rules can often lead to better risk assessments—something that Goel found in his own work. Hence the reasonable accuracy of Dressel and Farid’s volunteers, based on just seven pieces of information.

“That finding should not be interpreted as meaning that risk-assessment tools add no value,” says Goel. Instead, the message is “when you tell people to focus on the right things, even nonexperts can compete with machine-learning algorithms.”

Equivant make a similar point in a response to Dressel and Farid’s study, published on Wednesday. “The findings of ‘virtually equal predictive accuracy’ in this study,” the statement says, “instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment, actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice.”

There have been several studies showing that algorithms can be used to positive effect in the criminal-justice system. “We’re not saying you shouldn’t use them,” says Farid. “We’re saying you should understand them. You shouldn’t need people like us to say: This doesn’t work. You should have to prove that something works before hinging people’s lives on it.”

“Before we even get to fairness, we need to make sure that these tools are accurate to begin with,” adds Dressel. “If not, then they’re not fair to anyone.”. Predicting the future is not only the provenance of fortune tellers or media pundits. Predictive algorithms, based on extensive datasets and statistics have overtaken wholesale and retail operations as any online shopper knows. And in the last few years algorithms, are used to automate decision making for bank loans, school admissions, hiring and infamously in predicting recidivism – the probability that a defendant will commit another crime in the next two years.

COMPAS, which stands for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions, is such a program and was singled out by ProPublica earlier this year as being racially biased. COMPAS utilizes 137 variables in its proprietary and unpublished scoring algorithm; race is not one of those variables. ProPublica used a dataset of defendants in Broward County, Florida. The data included demographics, criminal history, a COMPAS score [1] and the criminal actions in the subsequent two years. ProPublica then crosslinked this data with the defendants’ race. Their findings are generally accepted by all sides

COMPAS is moderately accurate in identifying white and black recidivism about 60% of the time.

COMPAS’s errors reflect apparent racial bias. Blacks are more often wrongly identified as recidivist risks (statistically a false positive) and whites more often erroneously identified as not being a risk (a false negative).

The “penalty” for being misclassified as a higher risk is more likely to be stiffer punishment. Being misclassified as a lower risk is like a “Get out of jail” card.

As you might anticipate, significant controversy followed couched mostly in an academic fight over which statistical measures or calculations more accurately depicted the bias. A study in Science Advances revisits the discussion and comes to a different conclusion.

The study

In the current study, assessment by humans was compared to that of COMPAS using that Broward County dataset. The humans were found on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [2], paid a dollar to participate and a $5 bonus if they were accurate more than 60% of the time.

Humans were just as accurate as the algorithm (62 vs. 65%)

The errors by the algorithm and humans were identical, overpredicting (false positives) recidivism for black defendants and underpredicting (false negatives) for white defendants.

Humans COMPAS Black % White % Black % White % Accuracy* 68.2 67.6 64.9 65.7 False Positives 37.1 27.2 40.4 25.4 False Negatives 29.2 40.3 30.9 47.9

* Accuracy is the sum of true positives and true negatives statistically speaking

The human assessors used only seven variables, not the 137 of COMPAS. [3] This suggests that the algorithm was needlessly complex at least in deciding recidivism risk. In fact, the researchers found that just two variables, defendant age, and the number of prior convictions was as accurate as COMPAS’s predictions.

Of more significant interest is the finding that when human assessors were given the additional information regarding defendant race it had no impact. They were just as accurate and demonstrated the same racial disparity in false positives and negatives. Race was an associated confounder, but it was not the cause of the statistical difference. ProPublica’s narrative of racial bias was incorrect.

Algorithms are statistical models involving choices. If you optimize to find all the true positives, your false positives will increase. Lower your false positive rate and the false negatives increase. Do we want to incarcerate more or less? The MIT Technology Review puts it this way.

“Are we primarily interested in taking as few chances as possible that someone will skip bail or re-offend? What trade-offs should we make to ensure justice and lower the massive social costs of imprisonment?”

COMPAS is meant to serve as a decision aid. The purpose of the 137 variables is to create a variety of scales depicting substance abuse, environment, criminal opportunity, associates, etc. Its role is to assist the humans of our justice system in determining an appropriate punishment. [4] None of the studies, to my knowledge, looked at the sentences handed down. The current research ends as follows:

“When considering using software such as COMPAS in making decisions that will significantly affect the lives and well-being of criminal defendants, it is valuable to ask whether we would put these decisions in the hands of random people who respond to an online survey because, in the end, the results from these two approaches appear to be indistinguishable.”

The answer is no. COMPAS and similar algorithms are tools, not a replacement FOR human judgment. They facilitate but do not automate. ProPublica is correct when saying algorithmic decisions need to be understood by their human users and require continuous validation and refinement. But ProPublica’s narrative, that evil forces were responsible for a racially biased algorithm are not true.

[1] COMPAS is scored on a 1 to 10 scale, with scores greater than 8 being at high risk for repeat offenders

[2] Amazon's Mechanical Turk is a crowd-sourced marketplace for human assistance. In this case for people to participate in a survey.

[3] The variables were gender, age, criminal charge, misdemeanor or felony, prior adult convictions and prior juvenile felony and misdemeanor charges.

[4] As the COMPAS manual states: “Criminal justice agencies across the nation use COMPAS to inform decisions regarding the placement, supervision and case management of offenders.” [Emphasis added]

Source: The accuracy, fairness and limits of predicting recidivism Science Advances 2018. ← Read the story

Across the nation, judges, probation and parole officers are increasingly using algorithms to assess a criminal defendant’s likelihood of becoming a recidivist – a term used to describe criminals who re-offend. There are dozens of these risk assessment algorithms in use. Many states have built their own assessments, and several academics have written tools. There are also two leading nationwide tools offered by commercial vendors.

We set out to assess one of the commercial tools made by Northpointe, Inc. to discover the underlying accuracy of their recidivism algorithm and to test whether the algorithm was biased against certain groups.

Our analysis of Northpointe’s tool, called COMPAS (which stands for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions), found that black defendants were far more likely than white defendants to be incorrectly judged to be at a higher risk of recidivism, while white defendants were more likely than black defendants to be incorrectly flagged as low risk.

We looked at more than 10,000 criminal defendants in Broward County, Florida, and compared their predicted recidivism rates with the rate that actually occurred over a two-year period. When most defendants are booked in jail, they respond to a COMPAS questionnaire. Their answers are fed into the COMPAS software to generate several scores including predictions of “Risk of Recidivism” and “Risk of Violent Recidivism.”

We compared the recidivism risk categories predicted by the COMPAS tool to the actual recidivism rates of defendants in the two years after they were scored, and found that the score correctly predicted an offender’s recidivism 61 percent of the time, but was only correct in its predictions of violent recidivism 20 percent of the time.

In forecasting who would re-offend, the algorithm correctly predicted recidivism for black and white defendants at roughly the same rate (59 percent for white defendants, and 63 percent for black defendants) but made mistakes in very different ways. It misclassifies the white and black defendants differently when examined over a two-year follow-up period.

Our analysis found that:

Black defendants were often predicted to be at a higher risk of recidivism than they actually were. Our analysis found that black defendants who did not recidivate over a two-year period were nearly twice as likely to be misclassified as higher risk compared to their white counterparts (45 percent vs. 23 percent).

White defendants were often predicted to be less risky than they were. Our analysis found that white defendants who re-offended within the next two years were mistakenly labeled low risk almost twice as often as black re-offenders (48 percent vs. 28 percent).

The analysis also showed that even when controlling for prior crimes, future recidivism, age, and gender, black defendants were 45 percent more likely to be assigned higher risk scores than white defendants.

Black defendants were also twice as likely as white defendants to be misclassified as being a higher risk of violent recidivism. And white violent recidivists were 63 percent more likely to have been misclassified as a low risk of violent recidivism, compared with black violent recidivists.

The violent recidivism analysis also showed that even when controlling for prior crimes, future recidivism, age, and gender, black defendants were 77 percent more likely to be assigned higher risk scores than white defendants.

Previous Work

In 2013, researchers Sarah Desmarais and Jay Singh examined 19 different recidivism risk methodologies being used in the United States and found that “in most cases, validity had only been examined in one or two studies conducted in the United States, and frequently, those investigations were completed by the same people who developed the instrument.”

Their analysis of the research published before March2013 found that the tools “were moderate at best in terms of predictive validity,” Desmarais said in an interview. And she could not find any substantial set of studies conducted in the United States that examined whether risk scores were racially biased. “The data do not exist,” she said.

The largest examination of racial bias in U.S. risk assessment algorithms since then is a 2016 paper by Jennifer Skeem at University of California, Berkeley and Christopher T. Lowenkamp from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts. They examined data about 34,000 federal offenders to test the predictive validity of the Post Conviction Risk Assessment tool that was developed by the federal courts to help probation and parole officers determine the level of supervision required for an inmate upon release.

The authors found that the average risk score for black offenders was higher than for white offenders, but that concluded the differences were not attributable to bias.

A 2013 study analyzed the predictive validity among various races for another score called the Level of Service Inventory, one of the most popular commercial risk scores from Multi-Health Systems. That study found that “ethnic minorities have higher LS scores than nonminorities.” The study authors, who are Canadian, noted that racial disparities were more consistently found in the U.S. than in Canada. “One possibility may be that systematic bias within the justice system may distort the measurement of ‘true’ recidivism,” they wrote.

A smaller 2006 study of 532 male residents of a work-release program also found “a tendency toward classification errors for African Americans” in the Level of Service Inventory-Revised. The study, by Kevin Whiteacre of the Salvation Army Correctional Services Program, found that 42.7 percent of African Americans were incorrectly classified as high risk, compared with 27.7 percent of Caucasians and 25 percent of Hispanics. That study urged correctional facilities to investigate the their use of the scores independently using a simple contingency table approach that we follow later in this study.

As risk scores move further into the mainstream of the criminal justice system, policy makers have called for further studies of whether the scores are biased.

When he was U.S. Attorney General, Eric Holder asked the U.S. Sentencing Commission to study potential bias in the tests used at sentencing. “Although these measures were crafted with the best of intentions, I am concerned that they inadvertently undermine our efforts to ensure individualized and equal justice,” he said, adding, “they may exacerbate unwarranted and unjust disparities that are already far too common in our criminal justice system and in our society.” The sentencing commission says it is not currently conducting an analysis of bias in risk assessments.

So ProPublica did its own analysis.

How We Acquired the Data

We chose to examine the COMPAS algorithm because it is one of the most popular scores used nationwide and is increasingly being used in pretrial and sentencing, the so-called “front-end” of the criminal justice system. We chose Broward County because it is a large jurisdiction using the COMPAS tool in pretrial release decisions and Florida has strong open-records laws.

Through a public records request, ProPublica obtained two years worth of COMPAS scores from the Broward County Sheriff’s Office in Florida. We received data for all 18,610 people who were scored in 2013 and 2014.

Because Broward County primarily uses the score to determine whether to release or detain a defendant before his or her trial, we discarded scores that were assessed at parole, probation or other stages in the criminal justice system. That left us with 11,757 people who were assessed at the pretrial stage.

Each pretrial defendant received at least three COMPAS scores: “Risk of Recidivism,” “Risk of Violence” and “Risk of Failure to Appear.”

COMPAS scores for each defendant ranged from 1 to 10, with ten being the highest risk. Scores 1 to 4 were labeled by COMPAS as “Low”; 5 to 7 were labeled “Medium”; and 8 to 10 were labeled “High.”

Starting with the database of COMPAS scores, we built a profile of each person’s criminal history, both before and after they were scored. We collected public criminal records from the Broward County Clerk’s Office website through April 1, 2016. On average, defendants in our dataset were not incarcerated for 622.87 days (sd: 329.19).

We matched the criminal records to the COMPAS records using a person’s first and last names and date of birth. This is the same technique used in the Broward County COMPAS validation study conducted by researchers at Florida State University in 2010. We downloaded around 80,000 criminal records from the Broward County Clerk’s Office website.

To determine race, we used the race classifications used by the Broward County Sheriff’s Office, which identifies defendants as black, white, Hispanic, Asian and Native American. In 343 cases, the race was marked as Other.

We also compiled each person’s record of incarceration. We received jail records from the Broward County Sheriff’s Office from January 2013 to April 2016, and we downloaded public incarceration records from the Florida Department of Corrections website.

We found that sometimes people’s names or dates of birth were incorrectly entered in some records – which led to incorrect matches between an individual’s COMPAS score and his or her criminal records. We attempted to determine how many records were affected. In a random sample of 400 cases, we found an error rate of 3.75 percent (CI: +/- 1.8 percent).

How We Defined Recidivism

Defining recidivism was key to our analysis.

In a 2009 study examining the predictive power of its COMPAS score, Northpointe defined recidivism as “a finger-printable arrest involving a charge and a filing for any uniform crime reporting (UCR) code.” We interpreted that to mean a criminal offense that resulted in a jail booking and took place after the crime for which the person was COMPAS scored.

It was not always clear, however, which criminal case was associated with an individual’s COMPAS score. To match COMPAS scores with accompanying cases, we considered cases with arrest dates or charge dates within 30 days of a COMPAS assessment being conducted. In some instances, we could not find any corresponding charges to COMPAS scores. We removed those cases from our analysis.

Next, we sought to determine if a person had been charged with a new crime subsequent to crime for which they were COMPAS screened. We did not count traffic tickets and some municipal ordinance violations as recidivism. We did not count as recidivists people who were arrested for failing to appear at their court hearings, or people who were later charged with a crime that occurred prior to their COMPAS screening.

For violent recidivism, we used the FBI’s definition of violent crime, a category that includes murder, manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery and aggravated assault.

For most of our analysis, we defined recidivism as a new arrest within two years. We based this decision on Northpointe’s practitioners guide, which says that its recidivism score is meant to predict “a new misdemeanor or felony offense within two years of the COMPAS administration date.”

In addition, a recent study of 25,000 federal prisoners’ recidivism rates by the U.S. Sentencing Commission, which shows that most recidivists commit a new crime within the first two years after release (if they are going to commit a crime at all).

Analysis

We analyzed the COMPAS scores for “Risk of Recidivism” and “Risk of Violent Recidivism.” We did not analyze the COMPAS score for “Risk of Failure to Appear.”

We began by looking at the risk of recidivism score. Our initial analysis looked at the simple distribution of the COMPAS decile scores among whites and blacks. We plotted the distribution of these scores for 6,172 defendants who had not been arrested for a new offense or who had recidivated within two years.

These histograms show that scores for white defendants were skewed toward lower-risk categories, while black defendants were evenly distributed across scores. In our two-year sample, there were 3,175 black defendants and 2,103 white defendants, with 1,175 female defendants and 4,997 male defendants. There were 2,809 defendants who recidivated within two years in this sample.

The histograms for COMPAS’s violent risk score also show a disparity in score distribution between white and black defendants. The sample we used to test COMPAS’s violent recidivism score was slightly smaller than for the general recidivism score: 4,020 defendants, 1,918 black defendants and 1,459 white defendants. There were 652 violent recidivists.

While there is a clear difference between the distributions of COMPAS scores for white and black defendants, merely looking at the distributions does not account for other demographic and behavioral factors.

To test racial disparities in the score controlling for other factors, we created a logistic regression model that considered race, age, criminal history, future recidivism, charge degree, gender and age.

Risk of General Recidivism Logistic Model Dependent variable: Score (Low vs Medium and High) Female 0.221*** (0.080) Age: Greater than 45 -1.356*** (0.099) Age: Less than 25 1.308*** (0.076) Black 0.477*** (0.069) Asian -0.254 (0.478) Hispanic -0.428*** (0.128) Native American 1.394* (0.766) Other -0.826*** (0.162) Number of Priors 0.269*** (0.011) Misdemeanor -0.311*** (0.067) Two year Recidivism 0.686*** (0.064) Constant -1.526*** (0.079) Observations 6,172 Akaike Inf. Crit. 6,192.402 Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We used those factors to model the odds of getting a higher COMPAS score. According to Northpointe’s practitioners guide, COMPAS “scores in the medium and high range garner more interest from supervision agencies than low scores, as a low score would suggest there is little risk of general recidivism,” so we considered scores any higher than “low” to indicate a risk of recidivism.

Our logistic model found that the most predictive factor of a higher risk score was age. Defendants younger than 25 years old were 2.5 times as likely to get a higher score than middle aged offenders, even when controlling for prior crimes, future criminality, race and gender.

Race was also quite predictive of a higher score. While Black defendants had higher recidivism rates overall, when adjusted for this difference and other factors, they were 45 percent more likely to get a higher score than whites.

Surprisingly, given their lower levels of criminality overall, female defendants were 19.4 percent more likely to get a higher score than men, controlling for the same factors.

Risk of Violent Recidivism Logistic Model Dependent variable: Score (Low vs Medium and High) Female -0.729*** (0.127) Age: Greater than 45 -1.742*** (0.184) Age: Less than 25 3.146*** (0.115) Black 0.659*** (0.108) Asian -0.985 (0.705) Hispanic -0.064 (0.191) Native American 0.448 (1.035) Other -0.205 (0.225) Number of Priors 0.138*** (0.012) Misdemeanor -0.164* (0.098) Two Year Recidivism 0.934*** (0.115) Constant -2.243*** (0.113) Observations 4,020 Akaike Inf. Crit. 3,022.779 Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

The COMPAS software also has a score for risk of violent recidivism. We analyzed 4,020 people who were scored for violent recidivism over a period of two years (not including time spent incarcerated). We ran a similar regression model for these scores.

Age was an even stronger predictor of a higher score for violent recidivism. Our regression showed that young defendants were 6.4 times more likely to get a higher score than middle age defendants, when correcting for criminal history, gender, race and future violent recidivism.

Race was also predictive of a higher score for violent recidivism. Black defendants were 77.3 percent more likely than white defendants to receive a higher score, correcting for criminal history and future violent recidivism.

To test COMPAS’s overall predictive accuracy, we fit a Cox proportional hazards model to the data – the same technique that Northpointe used in its own validation study. A Cox model allows us to compare rates of recidivism while controlling for time. Because we aren’t controlling for other factors such as a defendant’s criminality we can include more people in this Cox model. For this analysis our sample size was 10,314 defendants (3,569 white defendants and 5,147 black defendants).

Risk of General Recidivism Cox Model High Risk 1.250*** (0.041) Medium Risk 0.796*** (0.041) Observations 13,344 R2 0.068 Max. Possible R2 0.990 Wald Test 954.820*** (df = 2) LR Test 942.824*** (df = 2) Score (Logrank) Test 1,054.767*** (df = 2) Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We considered people in our data set to be “at risk” from the day they were given the COMPAS score until the day they committed a new offense or April 1, 2016, whichever came first. We removed people from the risk set while they were incarcerated. The independent variable in the Cox model was the COMPAS categorical risk score.

The Cox model showed that people with high scores were 3.5 times as likely to recidivate as people in the low (scores 1 to 4) category. Northpointe’s study, found that people with high scores (scores 8 to 10) were 5.6 times as likely to recidivate. Both results indicate that the score has predictive value.

A Kaplan Meier survival plot also shows a clear difference in recidivism rates between each COMPAS score level.

Overall, the Cox regression had a concordance score of 63.6 percent. That means for any randomly selected pair of defendants in the sample, the COMPAS system can accurately rank their recidivism risk 63.6 percent of the time (e.g. if one person of the pair recidivates, that pair will count as a successful match if that person also had a higher score). In its study, Northpointe reported a slightly higher concordance: 68 percent.

Running the Cox model on the underlying risk scores - ranked 1 to 10 - rather than the low, medium and high intervals yielded a slightly higher concordance of 66.4 percent.

Both results are lower than what Northpointe describes as a threshold for reliability. “A rule of thumb according to several recent articles is that AUCs of .70 or above typically indicate satisfactory predictive accuracy, and measures between .60 and .70 suggest low to moderate predictive accuracy,” the company says in its study.

The COMPAS violent recidivism score had a concordance of 65.1 percent.

The COMPAS system unevenly predicts recidivism between genders. According to Kaplan-Meier estimates, women rated high risk recidivated at a 47.5 percent rate during two years after they were scored. But men rated high risk recidivated at a much higher rate – 61.2 percent – over the same time period. This means that a high-risk woman has a much lower risk of recidivating than a high-risk man, a fact that may be overlooked by law enforcement officials interpreting the score.

Northpointe does offer a custom test for women, but it is not in use in Broward County.

The predictive accuracy of the COMPAS recidivism score was consistent between races in our study – 62.5 percent for white defendants vs. 62.3 percent for black defendants. The authors of the Northpointe study found a small difference in the concordance scores by race: 69 percent for white defendants and 67 percent for black defendants.

Across every risk category, black defendants recidivated at higher rates.

Risk of General Recidivism Cox Model (with Interaction Term) Black 0.279*** (0.061) Asian -0.777 (0.502) Hispanic -0.064 (0.097) Native American -1.255 (1.001) Other 0.014 (0.110) High Score 1.284*** (0.084) Medium Score 0.843*** (0.071) Black:High -0.190* (.100, p: 0.0574) Asian:High 1.316* (0.768) Hispanic:High -0.119 (0.198) Native American:High 1.956* (.083) Other:High 0.415 (0.259) Black:Medium -0.173* (.091, p: 0.0578) Asian:Medium 0.986 (0.711) Hispanic:Medium 0.065 (0.164) Native American:Medium 1.390 (1.120) Other:Medium -0.334 (0.232) Observations 13,344 R2 0.072 Max. Possible R2 0.990 Log Likelihood -30,280.410 Wald Test 988.830*** (df = 17) LR Test 993.709*** (df = 17) Score (Logrank) Test 1,104.894*** (df = 17) Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We also added a race-by-score interaction term to the Cox model. This term allowed us to consider whether the difference in recidivism between a high score and low score was different for black defendants and white defendants.

The coefficient on high scores for black defendants is almost statistically significant (0.0574). High-risk white defendants are 3.61 times as likely to recidivate as low-risk white defendants, while high-risk black defendants are only 2.99 times as likely to recidivate as low-risk black defendants. The hazard ratios for medium-risk defendants vs. low risk defendants also are different across races: 2.32 for white defendants and 1.95 for black defendants. Because of the gap in hazard ratios, we can conclude that the score is performing differently among racial subgroups.

We ran a similar analysis on COMPAS’s violent recidivism score, however we did not find a similar result. Here, we found that the interaction term on race and score was not significant, meaning that there is no significant difference the hazards of high and low risk black defendants and high and low risk white defendants.

Overall, there are far fewer violent recidivists than general recidivists and there isn’t a clear difference in the hazard rates across score levels for black and white recidivists. These Kaplan Meier plots show very low rates of violent recidivism.

Finally, we investigated whether certain types of errors – false positives and false negatives – were unevenly distributed among races. We used contingency tables to determine those relative rates following the analysis outlined in the 2006 paper from the Salvation Army.

We removed people from our data set for whom we had less than two years of recidivism information. The remaining population was 7,214 – slightly larger than the sample in the logistic models above, because we don’t need a defendant’s case information for this analysis. As in the logistic regression analysis, we marked scores other than “low” as higher risk. The following tables show how the COMPAS recidivism score performed:

All Defendants Low High Survived 2681 1282 Recidivated 1216 2035 FP rate: 32.35 FN rate: 37.40 PPV: 0.61 NPV: 0.69 LR+: 1.94 LR-: 0.55 Black Defendants Low High Survived 990 805 Recidivated 532 1369 FP rate: 44.85 FN rate: 27.99 PPV: 0.63 NPV: 0.65 LR+: 1.61 LR-: 0.51 White Defendants Low High Survived 1139 349 Recidivated 461 505 FP rate: 23.45 FN rate: 47.72 PPV: 0.59 NPV: 0.71 LR+: 2.23 LR-: 0.62

These contingency tables reveal that the algorithm is more likely to misclassify a black defendant as higher risk than a white defendant. Black defendants who do not recidivate were nearly twice as likely to be classified by COMPAS as higher risk compared to their white counterparts (45 percent vs. 23 percent). However, black defendants who scored higher did recidivate slightly more often than white defendants (63 percent vs. 59 percent).

The test tended to make the opposite mistake with whites, meaning that it was more likely to wrongly predict that white people would not commit additional crimes if released compared to black defendants. COMPAS under-classified white reoffenders as low risk 70.5 percent more often than black reoffenders (48 percent vs. 28 percent). The likelihood ratio for white defendants was slightly higher 2.23 than for black defendants 1.61.

We also tested whether restricting our definition of high risk to include only COMPAS’s high score, rather than including both medium and high scores, changed the results of our analysis. In that scenario, black defendants were three times as likely as white defendants to be falsely rated at high risk (16 percent vs. 5 percent).

We found similar results for the COMPAS violent recidivism score. As before, we calculated contingency tables based on how the score performed:

All Defendants Low High Survived 4121 1597 Recidivated 347 389 FP rate: 27.93 FN rate: 47.15 PPV: 0.20 NPV: 0.92 LR+: 1.89 LR-: 0.65 Black defendants Low High Survived 1692 1043 Recidivated 170 273 FP rate: 38.14 FN rate: 38.37 PPV: 0.21 NPV: 0.91 LR+: 1.62 LR-: 0.62 White defendants Low High Survived 1679 380 Recidivated 129 77 FP rate: 18.46 FN rate: 62.62 PPV: 0.17 NPV: 0.93 LR+: 2.03 LR-: 0.77

Black defendants were twice as likely as white defendants to be misclassified as a higher risk of violent recidivism, and white recidivists were misclassified as low risk 63.2 percent more often than black defendants. Black defendants who were classified as a higher risk of violent recidivism did recidivate at a slightly higher rate than white defendants (21 percent vs. 17 percent), and the likelihood ratio for white defendants was higher, 2.03, than for black defendants, 1.62.

We’ve published the calculations and data for this analysis on github.

← Read the story. If used properly, criminal-justice algorithms offer “the chance of a generation, and perhaps a lifetime, to reform sentencing and unwind mass incarceration in a scientific way.”

Imagine you are designing a system to predict which criminals will reoffend. One option is to optimize for “true positives,” meaning that you will identify as many people as possible who are at high risk of committing another crime. One problem with this approach is that it tends to increase the number of false positives: people who will be unjustly classified as likely reoffenders. The dial can be adjusted to deliver as few false positives as possible, but that tends to create more false negatives: likely reoffenders who slip through and get a more lenient treatment than warranted.

Raising the incidence of true positives or lowering the false positives are both ways to improve a statistical measure known as positive predictive value, or PPV. That is the percentage of all positives that are true.

As Gummadi points out, ProPublica compared false positive rates and false negative rates for blacks and whites and found them to be skewed in favor of whites. Northpointe, in contrast, compared the PPVs for different races and found them to be similar. In part because the recidivism rates for blacks and whites do in fact differ, it is mathematically likely that the positive predictive values for people in each group will be similar while the rates of false negatives are not.

One thing this tells us is that the broader society—lawmakers, the courts, an informed public—should decide what we want such algorithms to prioritize. Are we primarily interested in taking as few chances as possible that someone will skip bail or reoffend? What trade-offs should we make to ensure justice and lower the massive social costs of imprisonment?

No matter which way the dials are set, any algorithm will have biases—it is, after all, making a prediction based on generalized statistics, not on someone’s individual situation. But we can still use such systems to guide decisions that are wiser and fairer than the ones humans tend to make on their own.

The controversy surrounding the New York Police Department’s stop-and-frisk practices helps to show why. Between January 2004 and June 2012, New York City police conducted 4.4 million stops under a program that allowed officers to temporarily detain, question, and search people on the street for weapons and other contraband. But in fact, “88 percent of the 4.4 million stops resulted in no further action—meaning a vast majority of those stopped were doing nothing wrong,” the New York Times said in an editorial decrying the practice. What’s more: “In about 83 percent of cases, the person stopped was black or Hispanic, even though the two groups accounted for just over half the population.” This example of human bias, illuminated through data analysis, is a reminder that ADM systems could play a positive role in criminal justice. Used properly, they offer “the chance of a generation, and perhaps a lifetime, to reform sentencing and unwind mass incarceration in a scientific way,” according to Anthony Flores, Christopher Lowenkamp, and Kristin Bechtel, three researchers who found flaws in the methodology that ProPublica used to analyze COMPAS. The authors worry that this opportunity “is slipping away because of misinformation ­​and misunderstanding” about the technology.

But if we accept that algorithms might make life fairer if they are well designed, how can we know whether they are so designed?

Democratic societies should be working now to determine how much transparency they expect from ADM systems. Do we need new regulations of the software to ensure it can be properly inspected? Lawmakers, judges, and the public should have a say in which measures of fairness get prioritized by algorithms. But if the algorithms don’t actually reflect these value judgments, who will be held accountable?

These are the hard questions we need to answer if we expect to benefit from advances in algorithmic technology.

Matthias Spielkamp is executive director of AlgorithmWatch, an advocacy group that analyzes the risks and opportunities of automated decision making.. Algorithms that assess people’s likelihood to reoffend as part of the bail-setting process in criminal cases are, to be frank, really scary. Algorithms that assess people’s likelihood to reoffend as part of the bail-setting process in criminal cases are, to be frank, really scary.

We don’t know very much about how they work—the companies that make them We don’t know very much about how they work—the companies that make them are intensely secretive about what makes their products tick—and studies have suggested that they can harbor racial prejudices. Yet, these algorithms provide judges with information that is used to decide the course of somebody’s life.

Advertisement

Now, a Now, a new study published on Wednesday in Science Advances from Dartmouth College computer science professor Hany Farid and former student Julia Dressel claims to “cast significant doubt on the entire effort of algorithmic recidivism prediction,” the authors write. In short, bail algorithms don’t appear to perform any better than human beings.

Read More: AI Could Resurrect a Racist Housing Policy

According to their study, COMPAS—one of the most popular algorithms used by courts in the US According to their study, COMPAS—one of the most popular algorithms used by courts in the US and elsewhere to predict recidivism—is no more accurate than 20 people asked to estimate the likelihood of recidivism in an online survey. Additionally, COMPAS didn’t outperform a simple linear predictor algorithm armed with just two inputs: age and number of crimes committed. COMPAS, in contrast, uses 137 unique inputs to make decisions , the study's authors write.

In In a statement released after the study was published , Equivant—the company behind COMPAS—argued that COMPAS in fact only uses six inputs, and that the rest are "needs factors that are NOT used as predictors in the COMPAS risk assessment." In response, the authors wrote to me in an email that "regardless how many features are used by COMPAS, the fact is that a simple predictor with only two features and people responding to an online survey are as accurate as COMPAS."

“Our point isn’t that it's good or bad,” said co-author Farid over the phone. “But we would like the courts to understand that the weight they give these risk assessments should be based on an understanding that the accuracy from this commercial black box software is exactly the same as asking a bunch of people to respond to an online survey.” “Our point isn’t that it's good or bad,” said co-author Farid over the phone. “But we would like the courts to understand that the weight they give these risk assessments should be based on an understanding that the accuracy from this commercial black box software is exactly the same as asking a bunch of people to respond to an online survey.”

Advertisement

The baseline accuracy of online respondents estimating recidivism within two years was 63 percent, the authors report, while COMPAS’ is 65 percent (a finding based on a dataset covering its use in Broward County, Florida, between 2013 and 2014). The simple linear algorithm with just two inputs had an accuracy of 66 percent. It’s worth noting that many researchers prefer to gauge accuracy with a different statistical measure The baseline accuracy of online respondents estimating recidivism within two years was 63 percent, the authors report, while COMPAS’ is 65 percent (a finding based on a dataset covering its use in Broward County, Florida, between 2013 and 2014). The simple linear algorithm with just two inputs had an accuracy of 66 percent. It’s worth noting that many researchers prefer to gauge accuracy with a different statistical measure known as AUC-ROC —even using this measure, though, online survey respondents managed an AUC-ROC value of .71, while COMPAS achieves .70.

"The findings of 'virtually equal predictive accuracy' in this study, instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment," Equivant wrote in an online statement, "actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice." "The findings of 'virtually equal predictive accuracy' in this study, instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment," Equivant wrote in an online statement, "actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice."

In response, the authors wrote me that .70 AUC is indeed the industry standard, but noted that their study participants nonetheless managed .71. "Therefore, regardless of the preferred measure of predictive performance, COMPAS and the human participants are indistinguishable," they wrote. In response, the authors wrote me that .70 AUC is indeed the industry standard, but noted that their study participants nonetheless managed .71. "Therefore, regardless of the preferred measure of predictive performance, COMPAS and the human participants are indistinguishable," they wrote.

According to the study’s authors, their work suggests a cap on the accuracy of predictions about people’s futures based on historical data, whether the predictions are made by people or machines. Indeed, the whole idea of predicting someone’s behaviour two years from the present may be wrongheaded, Fahid said. Regardless, the overall point is these automated techniques are not any better than humans. According to the study’s authors, their work suggests a cap on the accuracy of predictions about people’s futures based on historical data, whether the predictions are made by people or machines. Indeed, the whole idea of predicting someone’s behaviour two years from the present may be wrongheaded, Fahid said. Regardless, the overall point is these automated techniques are not any better than humans.

Advertisement

A potential caveat, however: According to Sam Corbett-Davies—a Stanford PhD student who A potential caveat, however: According to Sam Corbett-Davies—a Stanford PhD student who has done research on the risks posed by bail algorithms —predictions based solely on select historical data (whether it’s done by algorithms or not) are often still more accurate than those that include more subjective factors like how a judge feels about tattoos.

"Judges are exposed to much more information: they can talk to defendants, assess their demeanor, see their tattoos, and ask about their upbringing or family life,” Corbett-Davies wrote me in an email. “All these extra factors are mostly useless, but they allow human biases to seep into judges' decisions. "Judges are exposed to much more information: they can talk to defendants, assess their demeanor, see their tattoos, and ask about their upbringing or family life,” Corbett-Davies wrote me in an email. “All these extra factors are mostly useless, but they allow human biases to seep into judges' decisions. Multiple studies have looked at thousands of judge decisions and found that algorithms based on very few factors can significantly outperform judges."

In other words, human "intuition" based on a grab bag of subjective factors may still be less accurate than algorithms (or even humans) just looking at select historical information about a person. In other words, human "intuition" based on a grab bag of subjective factors may still be less accurate than algorithms (or even humans) just looking at select historical information about a person.

Still, Fahid and Dressel’s findings are, at the very least, an indictment of how companies armed with flashy advertising and a staunch refusal to reveal their secret sauce have managed to flood the criminal justice system with algorithms that help to decide people’s futures without publicly vetted evidence of their accuracy. Still, Fahid and Dressel’s findings are, at the very least, an indictment of how companies armed with flashy advertising and a staunch refusal to reveal their secret sauce have managed to flood the criminal justice system with algorithms that help to decide people’s futures without publicly vetted evidence of their accuracy.

Indeed, study co-author Julia Dressel told me over the phone, the last published study that specifically compared the accuracy of algorithms versus that of humans in predicting recidivism (that they could find, anyway) was Indeed, study co-author Julia Dressel told me over the phone, the last published study that specifically compared the accuracy of algorithms versus that of humans in predicting recidivism (that they could find, anyway) was done in Canada in 1984 . A few things have changed since then.

“Companies should have to prove that these algorithms are actually accurate and effective,” Dressel told me over the phone. “I think the main step forward is recognizing that we need to be a bit wary of machine learning and artificial intelligence. And though these words sound impressive, and they can do really great things, we have to hold these technologies to a high standard.” “Companies should have to prove that these algorithms are actually accurate and effective,” Dressel told me over the phone. “I think the main step forward is recognizing that we need to be a bit wary of machine learning and artificial intelligence. And though these words sound impressive, and they can do really great things, we have to hold these technologies to a high standard.”

Get six of our favorite Motherboard stories every day by signing up for our newsletter .. Just like a professional chef or a heart surgeon, a machine learning algorithm is only as good as the training it receives. And as algorithms increasingly take the reigns and make decisions for humans, we’re finding out that a lot of them didn’t receive the finest education, as they mimic human race- and gender-based biases and even create new problems.

For these reasons, it’s particularly concerning that multiple states, including California, New York, and Wisconsin, use algorithms to predict which people will commit crimes again after they’ve been incarcerated. Even worse, it doesn’t even seem to work.

In a paper published Wednesday in the journal Science Advances, a pair of computer scientists at Dartmouth College found that a widely used computer program for predicting recidivism is no more accurate than completely untrained civilians. This program, called Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions, analyzes 137 different factors to determine how likely it is that a person will commit another crime after release. COMPAS considers factors like substance use, social isolation, and other elements that criminologists theorize can lead to recidivism, ranking people as high, medium, or low risk.

Machine learning algorithms that gauge incarcerated people's risk of recidivism are deeply flawed, say researchers. Flickr / Alexander C. Kafka

And sure, risk assessment sounds great. Why not have more data to help courts determine who is a greater risk? But what Dartmouth computer scientists Julia Dressel and Hany Farid found was that untrained individuals correctly judged recidivism risk with just about the same accuracy as COMPAS, suggesting that the supposed power of the algorithm isn’t actually there.

In one trial that included just a fraction of the information used by COMPAS (seven factors instead of 137, and excluding race), a group of human volunteers on the internet, with presumably no training in criminal risk assessment, evaluated case reports. They correctly estimated a person’s recidivism with 67 percent accuracy, compared to COMPAS’s 65 percent accuracy.

Take a moment to let that sink in. Untrained people on the web were slightly better at predicting whether a person would go back to jail than the tool that is literally designed to predict whether a person would go back to jail. And it gets worse. Once you add a defendant’s race, the volunteer’s false-positive and false-negative rates were within just a few percentage points of COMPAS’s. So not only is COMPAS not that great at predicting recidivism, it’s just as prone to racial bias as humans are. So much for the cold logic of computers.

The researchers found that humans were almost as good as the algorithm at predicting recidivism rates. They also found that humans and the algorithm had similar rates of false-positives and false-negatives when race is factored in. Carla Schaffer / AAAS

The researchers then made a linear model that matched COMPAS’s prediction rate with just two factors: age and number of previous convictions. Just to be clear, this prediction would also be unfair, but it demonstrates just how flawed COMPAS is.

And while this research is new, the big takeaways it espouses are not. In a 2016 investigation, ProPublica reporters found that not only is COMPAS unreliable, it’s actually systematically biased against African Americans, consistently rating black people as higher risk than whites who committed more serious crimes. Hopefully, this new research will help pave the way for juster risk assessment processes in the criminal justice system.

The fact that COMPAS is useless at best and deeply biased at worst suggests that computer-based risk assessments could be deepening the injustices that the justice system is supposed to address. Since risk assessment scores can be applied at any step of the criminal justice process, including while setting a person’s bond, determining whether they’re granted parole, and in some states, even for determining a person’s sentence, this research suggests a dire need to reexamine the use of COMPAS and other programs.. Although crime rates have fallen steadily since the 1990s, rates of recidivism remain a factor in the areas of both public safety and prisoner management. The National Institute of Justice defines recidivism as “criminal acts that resulted in rearrest, re-conviction or return to prison with or without a new sentence,” and with over 75 percent of released prisoners rearrested within five years, it’s apparent there’s room for improvement. In an effort to streamline sentencing, reduce recidivism and increase public safety, private companies have developed criminal justice algorithms for use in the courtroom. These tools — sometimes called “risk assessments” — aim to recommend sentence length and severity specific to each defendant based on a set of proprietary formulae. Unfortunately, the algorithms’ proprietary nature means that neither attorneys nor the general public have access to information necessary to understand or defend against these assessments.

There are dozens of these algorithms currently in use at federal and state levels across the nation. One of the most controversial, the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions or COMPAS, made headlines in 2016 when defendant Eric Loomis received a six-year sentence for reckless endangerment, eluding police, driving a car without the owner’s consent, possession of firearm, probation violation and resisting arrest — a sentence partially based on his COMPAS score. Loomis, a registered sex offender, challenged the verdict, claiming COMPAS violated his constitutional right of due process because he could not mount a proper challenge. His argument was two-fold: that the proprietary nature of the formula denied him and his defense team access to his data, and that COMPAS takes into account race and gender when predicting outcomes, which constitutes bias. His case was denied by the lower court, but Loomis refused to back down, instead appealing to the Wisconsin Supreme Court.

In July of 2016, a unanimous decision by the Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the state’s decision to use automated programs to determine sentencing. In her opinion, Justice Ann Walsh Bradley wrote: “Although it cannot be determinative, a sentencing court may use a COMPAS risk assessment as a relevant factor for such matters as: (1) diverting low-risk prison-bound offenders to a non-prison alternative; (2) assessing whether an offender can be supervised safely and effectively in the community; and (3) imposing terms and conditions of probation, supervision, and responses to violations.” In response to Loomis’ contention that race and particularly gender can skew results and interfere with due process, Bradley further explained that “considering gender in a COMPAS risk assessment is necessary to achieve statistical accuracy." Her opinion further cautioned that judges should be made aware of potential limitations of risk assessment tools and suggested guidelines for use such as quality control and validation checks on the software as well as user education.

A report from the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), however, warns that in many cases issues of validity and training are overlooked rather than addressed. To underscore their argument, EPIC, a public interest research center that focuses public attention on emerging privacy and civil liberties issues, compiled a chart matching states with the risk assessment tools used in their sentencing practices. They found more than 30 states that have never run a validation process on the algorithms in use within their state, suggesting that most of the time these programs are used without proper calibration.

The Problem with COMPAS

In states using COMPAS, defendants are asked to fill out a COMPAS questionnaire when they are booked into the criminal justice system. Their answers are analyzed by the proprietary COMPAS software, which generates predictive scores such as “risk of recidivism” and “risk of violent recidivism.”

These scores, calculated by the algorithm on a one-to-10 scale, are shown in a bar chart with 10 representing those most likely to reoffend. Judges receive these charts before sentencing to assist with determinations. COMPAS is not the only element a judge is supposed to consider when determining length and severity of sentence. Past criminal history, the circumstances of the crime (whether there was bodily harm committed or whether the offender was under personal stress) and whether or not the offender exhibits remorse are some examples of mitigating factors affecting sentencing. However, there is no way of telling how much weight a judge assigns to the information received from risk assessment software.

Taken on its own, the COMPAS chart seems like a reasonable, even helpful, bit of information; but the reality is much different. ProPublica conducted an analysis of the COMPAS algorithm and uncovered some valid concerns about the reliability and bias of the software.

In an analysis of over 10,000 criminal defendants in Broward County, Florida, it found that recidivism rates were only correctly predicted 61 percent of the time and violent recidivism was correctly predicted a mere 20 percent of the time.

The algorithm was correct in predicting recidivism at roughly the same rate for both black and white defendants, but black defendants were more often incorrectly predicted to be more likely to reoffend than their white counterparts, even when controlling for factors such as prior crimes.

Surprisingly, ProPublica also discovered that defendants under 25 were 2.5 times more likely to receive a higher score, even when elements such as gender and prior crimes were considered. Controlling for the same factors, females were 19.4 percent more likely to be assigned a high score as compared to males, even though females have a lower criminality rate overall.

Regardless of why the biases occurred, the facts support the notion that the software is indeed subjective at some level, possibly due to a developer’s bias, improper data or faulty quality control and review processes.

Other Studies on Risk Assessment Models

ProPublica is not the only organization to study the impact of gender or race on risk assessment models. In 2016, a paper published by Jennifer Skeem of the University of California, Berkeley and Christopher Lowenkamp, of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts discussed the possibility of racial bias in risk assessment computer models. Their studies concluded that the risk of racial bias was narrow and, “In light of our results, it seems that concerns expressed about risk assessment are exaggerated.” However, their conclusion indicated that there were both “good instruments” and “bad instruments” (referring to the risk assessment software) and that racial disparity in sentencing is a combination of factors, including the location where the defendant is sentenced, judges’ intuition and guidelines that heavily weigh criminal history. Another study conducted in 2013 by a team of Canadian researchers on the Level of Service Inventory (LSI), another risk assessment computer modeling tool, found racial bias more evident in the United States than in Canada.

Northpointe, now Equivant, the maker of COMPAS software, defends its product, claiming COMPAS has been peer-reviewed by several journal