A man of Asian descent in New Zealand had his passport application rejected after the software that approves photos claimed his eyes were closed.

Richard Lee, a 22-year-old DJ and student, had his photo turned down by the Department of Internal Affairs' application website when trying to get his passport renewed.

Despite submitting a front-facing photo with his eyes clearly open, the website said Mr Lee's picture did not meet requirements because the "subject eyes are closed". After the website repeatedly rejected the photo, Mr Lee was forced to call the department.. Born in Taiwan but brought up in New Zealand, he was trying to renew his passport so he could return to Australia after a Christmas break in New Zealand.. Another knock against the robots.

Earlier this week, an Asian New Zealander posted a screenshot to Facebook showing his passport photo being rejected for having closed eyes, even though they are visibly open. Twenty-two-year-old Richard Lee—an engineer student from New Zealand who was born in Taiwan and is currently studying in Melbourne, Australia—was trying to renew his passport online using an algorithm-based photo-checker operated by New Zealand’s department of internal affairs.

Advertisement

Lee took the mess-up in stride. “No hard feelings on my part,” he told Reuters. “I’ve always had very small eyes and facial recognition technology is relatively new and unsophisticated.” He also told Mashable that he ended up taking more photos, one of which was accepted by the system.

Passport-photo errors are common—as many as 20% of photos submitted to the system Lee used are rejected, most often for closed eyes—but the complexities are indicative of broader issues with facial-recognition technology. As far back as 2010, Time magazine reported that people using digital cameras equipped with similar algorithms had similar issues: Cameras would warn that people’s eyes (particularly people of Asian descent) were closed when they weren’t.

The racist stereotypes surrounding Asians’ eyes goes back even further. While Lee’s passport kerfuffle may have been an accident, it’s one we don’t want algorithms repeating.. ADVERTISEMENT

Look at this picture of 22-year-old Richard Lee. Do his eyes look open to you? Of course they do. But that didn’t stop an automated online system from rejecting his passport renewal because, according to the facial recognition software, his eyes were deemed to be closed.

“The photo you want to upload does not meet our criteria because: subject eyes are closed,” reads the form that Richard recently posted on Facebook. The online passport checker is run by New Zealand’s department for Internal Affairs, but it clearly needs a little recalibrating in order to recognize people of different ethnicities. Fortunately the engineering student found the funny side, and his passport was renewed after a later photograph was accepted.

More info: Facebook

Look at this picture of 22-year-old Richard Lee. Do his eyes look open to you?

Share icon

Of course they do! But not according to New Zealand’s online passport checker

Share icon

He recently tried to renew his passport but the system rejected him because his eyes were apparently closed

Share icon

The system helpfully provided examples of what Richard should actually look like…

Share icon

Fortunately the engineering student found the funny side, and his passport was renewed after a later photograph was accepted

ADVERTISEMENT

Share icon

Maybe he would have had more luck if he looked like this

Share icon. (Richard Lee / Facebook)

The Department of Internal Affairs has found itself in a bit of a blunder after a young Asian man submitting a photo for his passport had it rejected due to 'closed eyes'.

Richard Lee is a Kiwi living in Australia and was renewing his passport so he could return to the country after visiting for Christmas.

But when he submitted his photo to the Department of Internal Affair's online checker, it was rejected because it says his eyes were closed.

When Mr Lee called, he was told it was rejected due to the shadow in his eyes and "uneven lighting".

He went back to Australian Post and took some new photos, one of which was accepted, and his new passport showed up on Wednesday.

But while some have called the system 'racist', Mr Lee isn't taking it so seriously.

"I thought it was hilarious, not racist at all," Mr Lee told Newshub.

"It's pretty impressive that in the past 80 years we've gone from Turing Machines to a computer that could read a human face and notice the eyes are a bit smaller."

An Internal Affairs spokesperson told Newshub around 20 percent of photos are rejected for a variety of reasons, and the error Mr Lee received - that his eyes were closed - is just a generic error message.

"It would be impossible to have an error message for every circumstance," the spokesperson said.

"Photos are rejected for a wide variety of reasons but we don't believe our systems discriminate against any specific set of individuals."

Mr Lee's photo went viral after he posted it on his Facebook page, and he says he didn't expect it to get so big.

"I posted it as I found it funny and it's good banter for my friends," he said.

And he and his friends had a bit of fun with the error message was posted online, sharing edited images which showed larger eyes.. Anyone who’s dealt with the complexities of passport photo requirements would probably jump at the chance to have their pics checked online, but automated systems can have their own complications, as a New Zealand man recently learned.



Screenshot: YouTube/New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs

Richard Lee, 22, was using his country’s online passport checker when he encountered an unexpected error: The website said his photo was unacceptable because “subject eyes are closed“. Lee’s eyes, of course, were open, they just had epicanthal folds.

Photo: Facebook

Photo: Facebook

“I tried different ones and no luck, so I rang the office they said it’s to do with the shadow in my eyes and uneven lighting in the face,” Lee later told Daily Mail Australia. “So I got a few new ones taken at Australian Post and one of them went through.”

While Lee was eventually able to circumvent the software, his experience highlights how biases can get engineered into seemingly impartial systems. Early colour film, for instance, was optimised for white skin, making it difficult to correctly expose people of colour. And since Facebook began enforcing its , Native American users with names like “Creepingbear” have repeatedly reported getting suspended from the site.

Lee, however, says he was personally unfazed by the incident.

“The error message didn’t bother me that much, I saw the humour in it and obviously it’s a programming error in the recognition software,” said Lee. “Just a bit annoying with the delay and I’d expect to get a staff reply after 3 failed submissions.”

[Mashable]. . A New Zealand man encountered some difficulty while trying to renew his passport thanks to an online photo checker seemingly insensitive to his Asian ancestry.

“No hard feelings on my part,” Richard Lee told Reuters. “I’ve always had very small eyes and facial recognition technology is relatively new and unsophisticated.”

After posting the online system’s frustrating response, Richard Lee’s Facebook friends responded largely by laughing along with him at the reason for rejection.

More amused than dismayed, the 22-year-old took to Facebook to post the Department of Internal Affairs’ reason for rejecting his face (“Subject eyes are closed”) alongside the photo he submitted.

The engineering student’s encounter with automated bureaucracy quickly spread across the internet.

At the very least, Lee had a sense of humor about the situation. Using a Snapchat filter that ever so slightly exaggerated his features, he took another picture in which his eyes were more robot-friendly.

However, Lee persisted, resubmitting pictures until one met the agency’s criteria.

“It was a robot, no hard feelings,” he said. “I got my passport renewed in the end.”. Can software be racist? No, though humans can inadvertently design programs that appear racially insensitive, or, as was the case with Microsoft's Tay chatbot, intentionally turn an AI into a raging hatemonger. Facial recognition systems occasionally fall into the former category; the latest incident saw a New Zealand man of Asian descent have his passport photo rejected because the software thought his eyes were closed.

Twenty-two-year-old Richard Lee was attempting to renew his passport online but was surprised when the photo checker blocked his picture. "Subject eyes are closed," read the notification, despite the fact they are clearly open. It seems the software was having trouble with Taiwan-born Lee's epicanthal folds.

The engineering student, who is currently studying Aerospace Engineering and Business Management in Melbourne, contacted the Department of Internal Affairs to find out why the system was having a problem with his picture. A spokesperson told him 'uneven lighting on the face' caused it to be rejected, and explained that up to 20 percent of passport photos submitted online are rejected for various reasons, the most common being that the subject's eyes are closed.

Lee wasn't offended by the automated system's response. "No hard feelings on my part, I've always had very small eyes and facial recognition technology is relatively new and unsophisticated," he told Reuters. "It was a robot, no hard feelings. I got my passport renewed in the end."

The incident shows that while facial recognition has come a long way, there are still bumps in the road. Last year, Google found itself in trouble after its software labeled two black people in a photograph as "gorillas."

Lee said he saw the humor in his situation. "'Some people get offended way too easily because they're not as confident with their origins... At the end of the day we're all different and of course there are certain situations where you have to stick up and some situations it's just a good laugh." He even uploaded the image below to Facebook.. A New Zealand man of Asian descent had his passport photograph rejected when facial recognition software mistakenly registered his eyes as being closed.

Richard Lee's attempt to renew his passport was blocked after he submitted the picture to an online passport photo checker run by New Zealand's department of internal affairs.

Also Read: After disastrous Tay, Microsoft to release another chatbot

advertisement

The automated system told the 22-year-old engineering student the photo was invalid because his eyes were closed, even though they were clearly open, according to a copy of the notification posted on social media site Facebook.

"No hard feelings on my part, I've always had very small eyes and facial recognition technology is relatively new and unsophisticated," Lee told Reuters.

"It was a robot, no hard feelings. I got my passport renewed in the end."

Up to 20 percent of passport photos submitted online are rejected for various reasons, an Internal Affairs spokesman said.

"The most common error is a subject's eyes being closed and that was the generic error message sent in this case," he said.

The lighting in Lee's first photo was uneven, but a later one was accepted, he added.

Also Read: Microsoft's AI Twitter bot goes dark after racist, sexist tweets. . . 42 mins

S2 Ep. 9 - The Semifinals: It's All In The Details With only four teams of classically trained and self taught bakers left, the semi-finalists take on the safety bake round, inspired by guest judge Dwight Howard's favourite dessert.. Facial recognition is cool technology, but it’s not perfect. It’s used in many applications and services to provide an easier means of verification, such as Windows Hello using the tech to unlock Windows 10 so users aren’t required to manually enter credentials. But there are requirements to using facial recognition, such as holding your head just right and keeping your eyes wide open.

One New Zealand man of Asian descent discovered just how frustrating current facial recognition can be. He recently submitted a photograph of himself to renew his passport online, but was rejected because the facial recognition software claimed his eyes were closed, when in fact they were not.

Recommended Videos

The photo was submitted to the online passport photo checker used by New Zealand’s department of internal affairs. Twenty-two-year-old engineering student Richard Lee received a notification of the photograph’s rejection through a message posted on Facebook, stating that his eyes were closed and doesn’t meet the criteria.

“No hard feelings on my part, I’ve always had very small eyes and facial recognition technology is relatively new and unsophisticated,” Lee told Reuters. “It was a robot, no hard feelings. I got my passport renewed in the end.”

Lee, who was born in Taiwan and is currently studying aerospace engineering and business management in Melbourne, submitted his photo on Monday so he could return to Australia after visiting family in New Zealand this Christmas. He contacted the Department of Internal Affairs to find out why his photo was rejected, and was told that it wasn’t accepted due to the uneven lighting on his face.

Intent on renewing his passport, he submitted additional images for consideration, all of which were rejected by the facial recognition system. He then placed another call to find out the errors were due to the shadows in his eyes and the uneven lighting on his face. To resolve the issue, he headed to the Australian Post and had a new batch of pictures shot. Only one of them managed to be accepted.

That said, he finally renewed his passport, but the problem with the facial recognition fiasco led to nasty comments on Facebook, claiming that technology is getting racist, and more. Other Facebook users claimed to have had the same problem with facial recognition technology.

“Some people get offended way too easily because they’re not as confident with their origins,” Lee told The Daily Mail Australia. “At the end of the day we’re all different and of course there are certain situations where you have to stick up and some situations it’s just a good laugh.”

According to a spokesperson for the Department of Internal Affairs, up to 20 percent of the photos uploaded for passport renewals are rejected for various reasons. The most common error with photos is that the subjects’ eyes are closed. In the case of Richard Lee