. These guys set out to change that by analyzing records kept by the FDA, which has made it mandatory to report any incident in which a robotic procedure has gone wrong. This database is known as the Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience, or MAUDE, and contains both mandatory reports and voluntary ones submitted between 2000 and 2013.

Raman and co found over 10,000 reports related to robotic procedures of which more than 1,500 described a significant negative impact for the patient. On average, this represents about 550 adverse events per 100,000 procedures.

The number of robotic procedures dramatically increased during this period. And consequently the number of deaths and injuries has increased 30 times over since 2006. However, the number per procedure has remained more or less constant since 2007.

Raman and co say the types of adverse event fall into five categories. These include the equipment arcing or sparking during an operation, events that burned 193 patients between 2000 and 2013; in another category of incidents burned or broken pieces fell into the patient’s body, which occurred over 100 times and killed one patient; and another category involves uncontrolled movement of the instruments, which injured 52 patients and killed two of them. System errors such as the loss of video feed contributed to almost 800 other adverse events.

Curiously, although the database contains reports of 144 deaths during robotic surgery, the circumstances involved were recorded in detail in only a tiny fraction of cases. However, over 60 percent of these incidents were caused by device malfunctions while the rest were caused by factors such as operator error and the inherent risks of the surgery.

The fact that some forms of surgery are more risky than others is cause for concern. “The higher number of injury, death, and conversion per adverse event, in cardiothoracic and head and neck surgeries, could be indirectly explained by the higher complexity of the procedures, less frequent use of robotic devices, and less robotic expertise in these fields,” say Raman and co.

That may not reassure potential patients. Neither will the fact that the way the FDA collects this data means that these numbers almost certainly underestimate of the true death and injury levels.

That’s an interesting study that provides pause for thought for anyone about to undergo robotic surgery. The vast majority of these procedures take place without any adverse incidents. But Raman and co show that a significant proportion do suffer some kind of problem, even if it doesn’t lead to injury or death. “Device and instrument malfunctions have affected thousands of patients and surgical teams by causing complications and prolonged procedure times,” they conclude.. Study looks at problems experienced in robotic surgery. Robotic surgeries: Really safe?

A series of reports submitted to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration since 2000 were analyzed and it was found that robotic surgeries are not safe after all.

In recent years, the use of surgical robots in the medical community has increased, and surgeons have employed the assistance of machines during critical surgical procedures.

A report from MIT Technology Review found that patients had gone through over 1.7 million procedures in the U.S. that involved robots from 2007 to 2013.

Now, a study from researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Rush University Medical Center in Chicago found that these procedures are risky.

In a nutshell, the incident report stated that there were 144 deaths, 1,391 injuries, and 8,061 cases of device malfunctions that occurred during those aforementioned years.

Some of the reported cases sound so concerning. For instance, it was reported that there were instances when equipment sparked while doctors were performing a procedure. Such situations resulted in a total of 193 burned patients between 2000 and 2013.

Another incident report stated that broken pieces of the machine fell onto the bodies of the patients being operated. There were 100 cases of this kind, with one instance of death, as reported in Gizmodo.

Researchers said that death and injury cases for each procedure remained constant since 2007, according to a BBC report. But since the use of robotics in surgery is increasing, it would only mean that the number of events is also increasing each year.

Robot-assisted surgeries are usually costly, but they can offer several benefits. For instance, surgeons can use smaller tools that allow them to make more precise cuts.

This will mean that patients will heal faster, the risk of infection will be reduced, and fewer scars will be formed.

Furthermore, robots in surgery will also mean that not a lot of doctors should be present inside the operating room. This will make more of them available to tend to other cases.

Since there are risks associated with the machines, the study authors suggest that members of the surgical team should receive troubleshoot training so they will learn how to resume operation after an interruption.

The study has not compared rates of events to that of operations that did not employ robots. According to BBC, the study has not undergone peer review just yet.. They acknowledge that the data does not pinpoint why, but suggest it is because the former are more complex types of operations for which robots are less commonly used, so there is less experience and expertise available.. Surgery on humans using robots has been touted by some as a safer way to get your innards repaired – and now the figures are in for you to judge.

A team of university eggheads have counted up the number of medical cockups in America reported to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) from 2000 to 2013, and found there were 144 deaths during robot-assisted surgery, 1,391 injuries, and 8,061 counts of device malfunctions.

If that sounds terrible, consider that 1.7 million robo-operations were carried out between 2007 and 2013. Whether you're impressed or appalled, the number of errors has the experts mildly concerned, and they want better safety mechanisms.

"Despite widespread adoption of robotic systems for minimally invasive surgery, a non-negligible number of technical difficulties and complications are still being experienced during procedures," concludes the study [PDF], which was conducted by bods from MIT, Rush University Medical Center, and the University of Illinois.

Two deaths and 52 injuries were caused when the mechanical surgeon spontaneously powered down mid operation or made an incorrect movement. In another 10.5 per cent of recorded malfunctions, electrical sparks burned patients, resulting in 193 injuries.

A major problem, surprisingly, was that one death and 119 injuries were caused by pieces of the robot falling off into the patient, requiring a human surgical team to intervene and retrieve the broken hardware. 18 injuries were caused when the video systems on the human surgeon's console borked out mid-surgery.

The most dangerous kind of robot surgery is cardiothoracic and head and neck surgeries (6.4 per cent and 19.7 per cent of adverse results respectively), compared to 1.4 per cent and 1.9 per cent for gynecology and urology operations.

"The best that we can tell from the available data is that the higher number of injury, death, and conversion per adverse event in cardiothoracic and head and neck surgeries could be indirectly explained by the higher complexity of the procedures, less frequent use of robotic devices, and less robotic expertise in these fields," the study found.

"Although the use of robotic technology has rapidly grown in urology and gynecology for prostatectomy and hysterectomy, it has been slow to percolate into more complex areas, such as cardiothoracic and head and neck surgery."

Sadly the reports on precise causes are incomplete and the vast majority of deaths and injuries are simply listed as "malfunction," which could mean either the mechanical surgery unit failed or the operator cocked up, coauthor Dr Ramen told El Reg.

While the study shows there has been a vast increase in the number of robot operations in the time period studied, the chance of an accident happening has remained relatively constant, suggesting there are some fundamental problems to be fixed.

"Despite widespread adoption of robotic systems for minimally invasive surgery, a non-negligible number of technical difficulties and complications are still being experienced during procedures," the study concludes.

"Adoption of advanced techniques in design and operation of robotic surgical systems may reduce these preventable incidents in the future." ®

Bootnote

It's tricky to compare these robo-op figures to the error rate of pure-human surgeries for various dull reasons; one being that when mistakes are made, they're often settled out of court and are never admitted. With a machine involved, someone can blame the hardware. Between two and four per cent of operations in the US suffer from complications, according to one study, although that doesn't mean someone died in every case that went wrong.. Robotic surgery is on the rise as doctors look to make procedures less invasive, but according to a new study, the strategy comes with risks.

Looking at more than 10,000 incident reports from the FDA spanning from 2000 to 2013, researchers found that robots were involved in 144 patient deaths and 1,391 patient injuries.

For most of the reports involving death, very little information was shared on why the patient died -- meaning it's difficult to say whether it was human error, a problem with the robot, or the risks inherent in surgery.

Still, the study's authors -- from MIT, Rush University Medical Center, and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign -- found cause for alarm.

"Despite widespread adoption of robotic systems for minimally invasive surgery, a non-negligible number of technical difficulties and complications are still being experienced during procedures," the 