. The original Petition was accompanied by expert affidavits from Professor Linda Darling-Hammond (Stanford University), Professor Aaron Pallas (Columbia University Teachers College), Professor Audrey Amrein-Beardsley (Arizona State University), Carol Burris, (Long Island principal who has been recently recognized as both the Educator of the Year and the Principal of the Year), and Brad Lindell (Long Island research consultant and school psychologist who has conducted a detailed study of the Respondents’ teacher evaluation system). These individuals are nationally and locally renowned and respected in their respective fields, and are unaffiliated with Petitioner.

The original affidavit of Professor Linda Darling-Hammond of Stanford University, sworn to February 28, 2015, that the assessment being used in Respondents’ Growth Model does not allow measurement of growth for high-achieving and low achieving students: the learning of both high-achieving and low-achieving students is mis-measured because of the fact that the state tests pegged to grade-level standards do not include items that can measure growth for students who are already above grade level in their skills or who fall considerably below. This is not a problem that can be corrected by statistical adjustments.

(Original Darling-Hammond Aff. at ¶22.) Professor Darling-Hammond expressed a clear and specific opinion that the volatility in Petitioner’s ratings between school year 2012/13 and 2013/14 rendered the results irrational: The unexplained swing of Petitioner’s rating from 2012-2013 when she was identified as an “effective” teacher with a rating of 14 out of 20, to 2013-2014, when she was identified as an “ineffective” teacher with a rating of 1 out of 20, is clear proof the model and rating system, as applied to Petitioner, are irrational. These large swings demonstrate that, whatever it is the model is measuring, it is not measuring a stable construct we would recognize as reflecting teacher effectiveness, which should not and does not, in fact, change dramatically from year to year.

(Id. at ¶25.) Professor Darling-Hammond further expressed an expert opinion that the lack of any review process by Respondents was itself irrational. (Id. at ¶30.) Given the widely known challenges to accurate assessment of teachers using value-added methods, it is my further belief that the absence of any way for a particular teacher to challenge a VAM score on an individualized basis is irrational. For all the reasons outlined above, it is well-known and accepted among researchers that a particular individual score produced by a VAM procedure, even on the best developed and administrated model, may be wrong for a variety of reasons. It is my opinion that any teacher receiving an adverse score on a VAM model therefore should have the right to understand why he or she got the score awarded and appeal that score based upon the particular facts of any given case.

The original affidavit of Professor Aaron Pallas of Columbia University, sworn to February 25, 2015, explained, among other things, that the Respondents’ Growth Model was flawed because it pre-determined that only 7% of teachers could ever be rated as highly effective, and mandated that 7% of teachers would be rated as ineffective (the top and bottom ratings, respectively) without any scientific definition of effectiveness. (Original Pallas Aff. at ¶¶13, 14.) Professor Pallas also explained that the model did not provide a teacher, or his/her supervisor, with information at the beginning of the school year about what level of student

performance would result in the teacher being rated Highly Effective, Effective, Developing or Ineffective. Professor Pallas explained that, in New York, nobody knows before the end of the school year what was required of a teacher during the school year in order for that teacher to obtain a particular rating for that particular school year. (Id. at ¶¶s 20-22.)

The original affidavit of Professor Audrey Amrein-Beardsley, of Arizona State University, sworn to February 28, 2015, explained that VAM models, such as that being used by Respondent, have a 50% chance of showing that a teacher caused growth in students one year,

and a 50% chance of showing that the teacher detracted from student growth, so “the probabilitythat this teacher was truly effective or ineffective was no different that the flip of a coin.” (Amrein-Beardsley Aff. at ¶9.)

Dr. Carol Burris, a New York State Educator of the Year, and fellow of the National Education Policy Center, in her affidavit sworn to February 27, 2015, explained, among other things, that something is “seriously wrong if teachers, many of whom teach the same grade level, in the same school, using the same curriculum, could have their scores dramatically shift each year.”

Dr. Brad Lindell, a school psychologist with an advanced degree in applied research, in his affidavit sworn to March 1, 2015, provided the following example of why evaluations need to be reliable to be considered valid:

To understand the importance of reliability, I asked the Court to please consider the following. One of the most well-known measures of intelligence is the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children –V (WISC-V). One of the scores the WISC-V provides is a full scale IQ score that ranges from 40 to 160 with an IQ score of 100 being the average score. The reliability of this score with a one-year interval between two administrations of the test is generally in the .80 to .90 range. This indicates strong what is called test-retest reliability and the stability of the test over time. This means that if a student scored a 100 one year, it would be expected that when he is administered the test a year later, he would receive a similar score. If he received a score of 100 (average score) and then received a score of 120 (superior score) a year later and then a score of 85 (low average score) the following

year, the WISC-V would then not be considered reliable. If it was not reliable, then it could not be a valid measure of intelligence. The same argument is relevant to teacher assigned VAM scores. In order for the VAM scores to be a valid measure of teacher effectiveness, it needs to be reliable.. Just over half of New York City teachers were evaluated in the 2015–16 school year, in part, by tests in subjects or of students they didn’t teach, according to data obtained by Chalkbeat through a public records request.

At 53 percent of city teachers, it’s significant number, but substantially lower than in previous years, possibly thanks to a moratorium placed on using state tests, instituted mid-year.

That figure also highlights a key tension in evaluating all teachers by student achievement, even teachers who work with young students or in subjects like physical education. Being judged by other teachers’ students or subjects has long annoyed some educators and relieved others, who otherwise might have had to administer additional tests.

Supporters say evaluating teachers by group measures — often school-wide scores on standardized tests — helps create a sense of shared mission in a school. But the approach could also push teachers away from working in struggling schools.

RELATED: Do school vouchers really work?

“The key point around school-wide measures is that this could serve as a strong disincentive for these teachers in non-tested grades and subjects to stay in lower-performing schools,” said Matthew Steinberg at the University of Pennsylvania, who has studied teacher evaluation systems.

Will Mantell, a spokesperson for the New York City Department of Education, defended the district’s approach.

“Selecting school-wide [or] grade-wide … measures may better measure educators’ practice and support professional development,” he said. “For example, it makes sense for a social studies teacher who emphasizes writing in her classroom to be evaluated partially on an assessment of students’ ELA skills.”

New York’s evaluation system has gone through a number of substantial changes since it was first codified in state law in 2012, part of a nationwide push to connect teacher performance to student test scores, spurred by federal incentives.

Student assessments have comprised anywhere from 40 percent of the evaluation to essentially 50 percent, under a matrix system pushed by Governor Andrew Cuomo in 2015. Most recently, New York stopped using grades 3-8 English and math state tests as part of the system, but teachers must continue to be judged based on some assessment.

States across the country have struggled to evaluate teachers in traditionally non-tested grades and subjects. New York City has created a number of exams — known as performance assessments — in non-tested areas and given schools significant flexibility in which measures are used to judge their teachers.

In the 2015-16 school year, 53 percent of teachers were evaluated by a group metric, meaning one not focused on their subject or students. In the two previous years, the number was much higher — around 85 percent. It’s not clear why there was a substantial drop, but a spokesperson for the city’s education department notes that 2015-16 was an “outlier” due to the moratorium on state tests, instituted mid-year.

In all three years, most teachers were also evaluated by at least one individualized measure targeted to teachers’ grade, subject and students.

Data for the most recent school year are not yet available.

It’s also not clear what percentage of a teacher’s rating was based on group measures, and Mantell said this “varies from teacher to teacher.”

The United Federation of Teachers has pushed to give schools more individual options, including the use of more “authentic” assessments, not based on multiple choice questions.

“Right now, we don’t have enough options, which is why our most recent agreement with the DOE seeks to build more authentic assessments for additional grades and subjects,” said Michael Mulgrew, president of the UFT in a statement.

RELATED: De Blasio strikes deal with charter schools

Group measures offer an alternative to creating exams for each teacher in every grade and subject, which can lead to a proliferation of new tests, though in New York City teachers have often been judged by both group and individual metrics.

The challenge of evaluating teachers in traditionally untested areas is not unique to New York, and a number of states have embraced group or school-wide approaches. An analysis of 32 states, conducted by Steinberg, found that the average teacher in a non-tested grade or subject had about 7 percent of his or her evaluation based on school-wide achievement measures, though this averaged together substantial variation from place to place. Teachers in Tennessee and Florida have sued (unsuccessfully), arguing that it is unfair to evaluate them based on students they didn’t teach.

A more popular option, used in some districts in New York, has been student-learning objectives, in which teachers set goals for students often based on classroom exams. This approach has been praised for helping teachers set specific goals, but criticized as burdensome and easy to manipulate.

Research has found that using school-wide measures of performance tends to bring teachers closer to average performance. An analysis by the Brookings Institution showed that these group measures pulled down ratings of teachers with higher individual ratings at low-performing schools.

This story was originally posted on Chalkbeat, a nonprofit news site covering educational change in public schools.. Stories & Grievances

A NYC Math Teacher Fights Back After Receiving an Unfair 'Unsatisfactory' Rating from a Principal

Edmond Farrell uses the Freedom of Information Law and Department of Education/Teacher regulations in his fight to change an unfair 'unsatisfactory' rating. His rights in the administrative proceedings were violated, Chancellor Klein never answered his appeal, and now a Verified Petition has been filed with Commissioner Mills on the grounds of teacher abuse, abuse of discretion, and age discrimination. This case may change the practice of dumping good teachers in New York State.

Parents throughout New York City and across America are wondering why good teachers disappear from their child's schools while terrible - and sometimes even abusive - teachers are allowed to stay. We at parentadvocates.org believe that there is a "new" criteria for teachers that no one wants to talk about, because it is illegal. The criteria for obtaining employment at the Department of Education is no longer quality in teaching or "loves children". Instead, you will get hired if:(1) you are perceived as someone who will never ask questions or whistleblow what you see inside the secret hallways and offices of your school. In fact, you may have just moved to a new state because of crimes committed there, and you have a reason to maintain a school's secrecy.(2) you support the implementation of curricula that is unproven, unknown, and worthless, such as TERC math, Everyday Mathematics, "Balanced Literacy", etc., all of which are currently imposed on teachers throughout the US. The US government and educational researchers still have not found statistical research to support these programs. We all must see newspaper reports about success as part of the "Armstrong Williams" syndrome, or payola in the media. (See " Armstrong Williams: Education Propaganda, Payola, or Whatever You Call it, is Still False ADvertising and Political Misconduct ")This obviously "must keep confidential" criteria for teachers is harming our children and their future. They are not being given the skills and knowledge that they need to achieve and be successful in whatever they want to do because many kids drop out in frustration or are pushed out, suspended, arrested, and abused in order to leave. Principals do, we must not forget, want their school scores to go up rather than down, any way they can make this happen. Bonuses matter.Superintendents and principals have the power to "observe" subordinates and judge their performance based upon their "observations". Often the observation reports may be biased or prejudicial, and the teacher has little recourse. In New York City, an award-winning math teacher at John Adams High School, Mr. Edmond Farrell, was given six unsatisfactory observation reports after 9 years of satisfactory and excellent ratings. What changed was the administration: a new Principal, Mrs. Grace Zwillenberg, was appointed to the school in 2003-2004. She does not like Ed, who is over the age of 50. She wanted him out, and used observation reports to get him out of the school. He believes this is wrong, and is determined to prove this in court if necessary.In New York City observation reports have been designated in the courts as "opinions" ( Elentuck v Green, 202 AD2d 425, 608 NYS2d 701, 702; 1994 ). Will Mr. Farrell's U-rating hold up in court? He has filed a Verified Petition with New York State Education Commissioner Richard Mills to find out.Edmond Farrell, a math teacher in New York City who had the unfortunate experience of being, he believed, falsely accused of 'unsatisfactory' performance, fought back using references to the Freedom of Information Law and the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education. His letter, we believe, should be used as a model for anyone fighting an unfair assessment by someone higher up who is trying to get rid of/silence/harass him/her.I should add that at the Office of Appeals and Reviews Hearing for Edmond Farrell on November 8, 2004, I and Mr. Norman Scott, both listed as witnesses in the letter that follows, were barred from being witnesses or entering the Hearing at all. OAR Director Mrs. Virginia Caputo created quite a scene screaming at me that I could not, under any circumstances, be part of the Hearing, because "only Board of Education employees may be witnesses". When I asked to see this regulation in writing, she became even more angry, and told me she did have them available. Her Assistant in the OAR is Mr. Greg Brooks, who told me the same thing in the same way. Mr. Norman Scott was also barred because he currently does not work for the DOE and is retired. The other three witnesses listed in the letter below were dismissed before the Hearing. Ms. Caputo made a 'new' regulation for Mr. Scott, namely that he DID work for the DOE but not at John Adams High School. Mr. Farrell's UFT representative, Ms. Ritter, who accompanied him into the hearing, was also a retired teacher but had never taught at John Adams HS, was not an Attorney, had never seen Ed teach, and should therefore have been barred in a similar way. She was not.Mrs. Alvarez, the OAR Hearing Officer, told me, Mr. Norman Scott, Ms. Ritter, and Mr. Farrell after the Hearing had concluded and the tape machine turned off, "You cannot dispute what a Principal says".Betsy Combier, Editorconcerning the use of observation reports to fire teachers in NYC classrooms:September 16, 2004CERTIFIED MAILChancellor Joel I. KleinNew York City Department of Education52 Chambers StreetNew York, New York 10007Dr. Elizabeth AronsExecutive DirectorDivision of Human ResourcesNew York City Department of Education65 Court StreetBrooklyn, New York 11201Ms. Virginia CaputoDirectorOffice of Appeals and ReviewsNew York City Department of Education65 Court StreetBrooklyn, New York 11201Dear Chancellor Klein, Dr. Arons, and Ms. Caputo:I'm writing to you to complain that Mrs. Grace Zwillenberg, the principal of John Adams High School, gave me an arbitrary, capricious, irrational, and therefore, totally unjustified U-rating this past June, despite my teaching service for the 2003-2004 school year having been satisfactory. I'm requesting a full investigation of the matter, reversal of the U-rating to an S-rating, and that you take whatever additional action you deem appropriate.Page 2 of the Department's manual, The Appeal Process (a publication of the Division of Human Resources; See Rating Manuals ) in part:"The Appellant must file a full, written rebuttal to any of the reasons and documents furnished, and must notify the Office of Appeals and Reviews if any of the documents are being grieved with the Office of Labor Relations. If the Appellant so requests, the scheduling of the Review will be delayed until all grievance steps have been completed. The Appellant is required to file a Waiver Form with the Office of Appeals and Reviews to delay scheduling the Review."I wish to proceed as quickly as possible with my appeal of the U-rating. Therefore, I am not filing a waiver form.As a "full, written rebuttal to...the reasons and documents furnished," I wish to call the following matters to your personal attention:At the outset, it is appropriate to note that annual professional performance reviews of staff members in the New York City school system must be carried out in compliance with §100.2(o)(2)(iii)(a)(2) of the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education.As far as I have been able to determine, neither the UFT nor organizations representing parents were ever provided with an opportunity to comment on changes in the procedures for evaluating teachers, prior to their adoption. If so, then this is reflective of a violation of §100.2(o)(2)(iii)(a)(2) of the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education with respect to the formulation and implementation of the professional performance review plan.§100.2(o)(2)(iii)(a)(2) of the Commissioner's Regulations states:"Each superintendent and in the case of the City School District of the City of New York, the Chancellor, in collaboration with teachers, pupil personnel professionals, administrators and parents selected by the superintendent or in the case of the City School District of New York, the Chancellor, with the advice of their respective peers, shall develop the professional performance review plan, which shall be approved by the governing body of each school district or BOCES, filed in the district or BOCES office, as applicable, and available for review by any individual no later than September 10th of each year. The governing body of each school district and BOCES shall provide organizations representing parents and the recognized representative of the teachers' bargaining unit with an opportunity to comment on such plan prior to its adoption."The Part §100.2(o)(2) is available online On June 24, 2004, I was issued an Annual Professional Performance Review form (BE/DOP 9955B) which had been signed by Principal Grace Zwillenberg on June 18, 2004. I signed receipt for the form on the same date that it was issued to me.On the front of the form, Principal Zwillenberg conclusionally alleged that the following thirteen characteristics of my teaching service were "unsatisfactory":1) A. 4. Professional attitude and professional growth2) A. 5. Resourcefulness and initiative3) B. 1. Effect on character and personality growth of pupils4) B. 2. Control of class5) B. 3. Maintenance of wholesome classroom atmosphere6) B. 4. Planning and preparation of work7) B. 5. Skill in adapting instruction to individual needs and capacities8) B. 6. Effective use of appropriate methods and techniques9) B. 7. Skill in making class lessons interesting to pupils10) B. 8. Extent of pupil participation in the class and school program11) B. 9. Evidence of pupil growth in knowledge, skills, appreciations and attitude12) D. 2. Effort to establish and maintain good relationships with parents13) D. 3. Willingness to accept special assignments in connection with the school programOne indication that Principal Zwillenberg's allegations were conclusional is that she never presented me with a written statement of facts and statistics, with respect to any of the preceding thirteen categories, as a means of establishing that changes in the performance of my official duties must be made. Taking into account circumstances beyond my control, my position is that I was "sufficiently competent" with respect to every aspect of my teaching service that would properly form the basis of the annual professional performance review.To be "proper," in this instance, would mean that the review criteria were based on, but not limited to, the eight categories set forth in §100.2(o)(2)(iii)(b)(1) of the Commissioner's Regulations, and were developed collaboratively by teachers, pupil personnel professionals, administrators, and parents selected by the Chancellor, with the advice of their respective peers. The proposed professional performance review plan had to be submitted to parent groups and the UFT prior to going into effect so that they could offer comment. Finally, the plan had to be voted into place during a public meeting of the Panel for Educational Policy.A second indication that Principal Zwillenberg's allegations were conclusional is that she never presented me with a copy of the professional performance review plan currently in effect in the City School District of the City of New York, along with a factual or statistical statement demonstrating that my teaching service was not "sufficiently competent" with respect to each of the evaluation criteria set forth in the plan.Although Principal Zwillenberg's and Assistant Principal Aboughaida's written statements to me advised me to meet with AP Aboughaida on a weekly basis, I soon discovered that the meetings were not productive, and were designed to give the impression that the administration was offering assistance. Not once after any of the weekly meetings did APAboughaida ever issue me any written orders or mandates, directing that I change any aspect of my teaching service. Rather, APAboughaida kept suggesting that I "follow Region 5's Mathematics Prototype Investigation Model," and I kept informing him that teaching is essentially a function of the instructor's personality, and that there are no absolutes in teaching. As a result, the meetings became somewhat heated, rather than helpful in nature.On the back of the form, Principal Zwillenberg conclusionally alleged that each of six listed observation reports constituted "substantiating documentation" with respect to each of the thirteen preceding characteristics. Also, on the back of the form, she falsely alleged, within a listing of submitted records, that she (the principal) had observed an October 21, 2003 lesson. Rather, the assistant principal had observed the lesson.Page 3 of the Department's manual, Rating Pedagogical Staff Members (a publication of the Division of Human Resources), states, in part:"A Certification of Unsatisfactory or Doubtful work shall be accompanied by appropriate supporting data."Please be advised that my U-rating was not accompanied by "appropriate supporting data," because the records which did accompany it, did not contain statistical data, factual data, or instructions to staff that affect the public.Page 4 of the manual states, in part:"The characterization of an employee's service as Satisfactory indicates that he/she has demonstrated sufficient competence or improvement and a willingness to learn. If such has not been the case, ratings of Unsatisfactory or Doubtful should be used."Please be advised that my service was satisfactory, and, it goes without saying, "sufficiently competent." Neither Principal Zwillenberg nor anyone else issued me any instructions directing me to change any aspect, whatsoever, of my service.The manual's Foreword states, in part:"The admissibility of documents and written criticisms has been defined by contractual language, grievance/arbitration decisions and rulings adjudicated by both the legal system and the State Commissioner of Education. Hence, the principal must be aware of the type and nature of documents which are germane to the evaluation of staff and the need for clear, objectively written statements."It is reasonable to assume that Principal Zwillenberg was aware of "the need for clear, objectively written statements," i.e., statements that recited facts or statistics. Nonetheless, she inexplicably failed to ensure that AP, Regional Instructional Supervisor Ben Waxman, and she, herself, included any facts or statistics in the letters ("observation reports") that they wrote to me.Appendix B of the manual, as part of "SUGGESTED APPROACH TO A WRITTEN OBSERVATION," indicates that principals should include a:"Brief factual description of the lesson that would include aim, motivation, developmental procedures, summary, homework, and any major points of the lesson worth mentioning."Please be advised that none of the six observation reports that accompanied my U-rating contained a "factual description of the lesson."Appendix D of the manual, as part of "GUIDE FOR WRITTEN FORMAL OBSERVATION REPORT OF A LESSON," indicates that principals should:"Objectively state lesson development and activities."Please be advised that none of the six observation reports that accompanied my U-rating contained any "objective statements."The six observation reports consisted solely of advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations.It is my position that the advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations were not supported by a recitation of any facts or statistics.It is also my position that I was under no legal obligation to implement the recommendations, and that no teacher in the State of New York may be appropriately rated as "unsatisfactory" based on that teacher's alleged failure to implement recommendations, advice, suggestions, or the like.Principal Zwillenberg's determination to rate my service as "unsatisfactory" was not grounded on established legal principles. Her determination had no rational, factual basis in the record.On February 16, 1976, Arbitrator James J. Hill decided In the Matter of Arbitration between United Federation of Teachers and Board of Education of the City of New York, Cases Nos. 1330-0324-74 (Mae Leass) and 1330-0615-73 (Bertil Swanteson).On page 14, Arbitrator Hill stated:"A misstatement of fact, based on a misunderstanding of the supervisor, is of vital concern to the teacher, whether the error appears in an observation report or some other document, which both parties recognize as grievable.""As noted heretofore, the Board cites Union Counsel Kaufman on the non-grievability of professional evaluations of a teacher's performance and proficiency, but takes strong exception to his contention that factual allegations within such reports may be challenged under the grievance and arbitration provisions of the contract. Board's counsel states:"" 'Mr. Kaufman's claim that factual matters in such evaluations could be the subject of grievances is an impractical and illusory attempt to distinguish the indistinguishable. While such a distinction may appear reasonable at first, a thorough examination of an evaluatory report reveals that a rending of it into its factual and conclusory aspects is impossible. Such a report ordinarily sets forth those significant events which the supervisor has observed and then draws conclusions based upon his view of their educational soundness. The two are so intertwined and interrelated that to attempt to separate them would be analogous to Hercules' attempt to unravel the Gordian knot. ... The conclusions of the report, which Mr. Kaufman has admitted are not grievable, depend upon the factual matters set forth therein. To remove essential facts, which Mr. Kaufman claims is possible, would leave only unsupported conclusions, creating, in effect, a travesty of an observation report. As Hercules destroyed his problem rather than solving it, so this attempted separation of facts and conclusions would destroy an observation report.' (Brief, pp. 11-12)"" 'Mr. Kaufman's proposal for the handling of grievances concerning supervisory evaluations would leave, if the grievant were sustained in a claim of factual error, only baseless charges, not conclusions. Such a result was never agreed to by the Board.' (Brief, p. 14)"On page 15, Arbitrator Hill stated:"In my judgment, this argument is without merit. It seems to say that if an evaluator's conclusions rest on assertions of fact which are shown to be false, the assertions must remain lest the conclusion be seen as baseless. The argument is untenable. If the conclusions of an evaluator rest on assertions of fact which are shown to be false, the conclusions have no validity and should, in all fairness, be deleted. And the same result would obtain, it should be noted, if the Board were upheld in its original position that Article IV F 20 (5) was intended to provide for review of the accuracy and fairness of evaluative reports by some other appellate body, apart from the contract grievance procedures. Certainly if such evaluations should remain in the files, while the factual basis for such conclusions has been found to be false, the teacher should have the right to make it known, as a matter of record, that the judgment rests on factual allegations which have been deemed false and expunged from the record."However, the New York State Supreme Court, Appellate Division, Second Judicial Department, effectively reversed Arbitrator Hill's presumption that assertions of fact are to be found in observation reports. The (former) New York City Board of Education was aware of Elentuck v. Green (202 AD2d 425), a judicial decision involving (former) Chancellor Richard R. Green, and agreed with it.On May 13, 1998, Ron LeDonni, the Secretary of the (at the time) New York City Board of Education, wrote a letter (attached) to Mr. Irving Schachter informing him of a decision that had been issued by the New York City Board of Education's Freedom of Information Law Appeal Panel.Mr. LeDonni stated, in part:"You aver that observation reports contain factual data such as the date of the report, who was observed, the name of the school where the observation was held and depending on the subject matter, could contain mathematical problems, etc. You believe that based on relevant case law as stated in Gould v. NYC Police Department, 89 NY2d 267 (1996) and Mothers on the Move, Inc. v. Messer, 652 NYS 2d 773 (1997) that the reports should be disclosed because they contain factual information.""The Appeal Panel has reviewed your appeal, accompanying documents and applicable case law and makes the following determination.""In Elentuck v. Green, 202 A.D. 2d 425, 608 N.Y.S. 2d 701 (1994) the court held that lesson observation reports consist solely of advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations prepared by a supervisor regarding lesson preparation and classroom performance and are exempt from disclosure. The court found that observation reports do not contain factual or statistical tabulations or data. This case is clearly applicable regarding the records you have requested. Although the cases you cite in your appeal address various types of documents containing factual information which should not be exempt from disclosure, they are not applicable to the records you request nor do they reverse the holding in Elentuck."In Gould v. NYC Police Department (89 NY2d 267), the case which the (at the time) New York City Board of Education rejected as permitting public access to observation reports, the Court of Appeals stated:"The question before us, then, is whether the complaint follow-up reports contain 'factual data.' Although the term 'factual data' is not defined by statute, the meaning of the term can be discerned from the purpose underlying the intra-agency exemption, which is 'to protect the deliberative process of the government by ensuring that persons in an advisory role (will) be able to express their opinions freely to agency decision makers' (Matter of Xerox Corp. v Town of Webster, 65 NY2d 131, 132 -quoting Matter of Sea Crest Constr. Corp. v Stubing, 82 AD2d 546, 549). Consistent with this limited aim to safeguard internal government consultations and deliberations, the exemption does not apply when the requested material consists of 'statistical or factual tabulations or data' (Public Officers Law §87 2 g i). Factual data, therefore, simply means objective information, in contrast to opinions, ideas, or advice exchanged as part of the consultative or deliberative process of government decision making (see, Matter of Johnson Newspaper Corp. v Stainkamp, 94 AD2d 825, 827, affd on op below, 61 NY2d 958; Matter of Miracle Mile Assocs. v Yudelson, 68 AD2d 176, 181-182)."In Gould, the Court of Appeals also stated:"However, the Police Department argues that any witness statements contained in the reports, in particular, are not 'factual' because there is no assurance of the statements' accuracy and reliability. We decline to read such a reliability requirement into the phrase 'factual data,' as the dissent would have us do, and conclude that a witness statement constitutes factual data insofar as it embodies a factual account of the witness's observations."A different Court of Appeals case demonstrated that only facts, and not opinions, could be assessed as accurate or inaccurate.In Elliot M. Gross v. The New York Times Company (82 NY2d 146), the Court of Appeals stated:"Thus, in determining whether a particular communication is actionable, we continue to recognize and utilize the important distinction between a statement of opinion that implies a basis in facts which are not disclosed to the reader or listener (see, Hotchner v Castillo-Puche, 551 F2d 910, 913, cert denied sub nom. Hotchner v Doubleday & Co., 434 US 834; Restatement - Second- of Torts § 566), and a statement of opinion that is accompanied by a recitation of the facts on which it is based or one that does not imply the existence of undisclosed underlying facts (see, Ollman v Evans, supra, p 976; Buckley v Littell, 539 F2d 882, 893, cert denied 429 US 1062; Restatement -Second- of Torts § 556 comment c). The former are actionable not because they convey 'false opinions' but rather because a reasonable listener or reader would infer that 'the speaker (or writer) knows certain facts, unknown to the audience, which support the opinion and are detrimental to the person toward whom the communication is directed' (Steinhilber v Alphonse, supra, p 290).In contrast, the latter are not actionable because, as was noted by the dissenting opinion in Milkovich v Lorain Journal Co. (supra, pp 26-27, p 28 n3 -Brennan, J.), a proffered hypothesis that is offered after a full recitation of the facts on which it is based is readily understood by the audience as conjecture (see, e.g., Potomac Valve & Fitting, Inc. v. Crawford Fitting Co., 829 F2d 1280, 1290). Indeed, this class of statements provides a clear illustration of situations in which the full context of the communication 'signal's readers or listeners that what is being read or heard is likely to be opinion, not fact' (Steinhilber v Alphonse, supra, p 292; quoting Ollman v Evans, supra, p 983)."To base my "unsatisfactory" rating, or any teacher's "unsatisfactory" rating, on records that do not contain statistical or factual tabulations or data, and instructions to staff that affect the public, is arbitrary, capricious, irrational, and flies in the face of the fundamental due process that is guaranteed to U.S. citizens by the Federal Constitution.In Canty v. New York City Board of Education (312 F. Supp. 254), the United States District Court of the Southern District of New York stated:"The terms 'arbitrary' and 'capricious' embrace a concept which emerges from the due process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and operates to guarantee that the acts of government will be grounded on established legal principles and have a rational factual basis. A decision is arbitrary or capricious when it is not supported by evidence or when there is no reasonable justification for the decision."On February 2, 2000, Mr. Robert J. Freeman, Executive Director of the New York State Committee on Open Government issued Advisory Opinion #11936 to the Attorney for the Ellenville Central School District.Within his letter, Mr. Freeman offered his opinion concerning public access to "ratings of 'satisfactory' or 'unsatisfactory' given to teachers for classroom evaluations." Mr. Freeman pointed out "that the Appellate Division, Second Department, has determined that records apparently analogous to those requested may be withheld."In addition, Mr. Freeman referred to the precise same case that Mr. LeDonni did, Elentuck v. Green (202 AD2d 425), and quoted from the decision:"The lesson observation reports consist solely of advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations prepared by the school assistant principal regarding lesson preparation and classroom performance. As such, these reports fall squarely within the protection of Public Officers Law §87(2)(g)."Since observation reports consist "solely of advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations," teachers might wonder whether or not they are required to implement the advice and recommendations, and take the criticisms and evaluations to heart, lest they be rated "unsatisfactory" for not having "demonstrated sufficient competence or improvement and a willingness to learn."Throughout the State of New York, teachers are not required to implement advice, recommendations, suggestions, and the like, even if they originate from supervisory personnel. Furthermore, teachers may not be rated "unsatisfactory," or otherwise disciplined, for an alleged failure to implement such.On March 6, 1986, (at the time) Commissioner of Education Gordon Ambach determined Appeal of Board of Education of the Orchard Park Central School District (25 EDR 331).Commissioner Ambach stated on page 332:"Absent a violation of an established school rule or a direct order from a supervisor, respondent's behavior would not constitute neglect of duty. Although petitioner identifies certain provisions of the school building manual as the source of a rule against leaving students to work unsupervised in the hallway, those provisions are expressed in terms of suggestions to teachers rather than directives. Upon careful review of the record, I find that petitioner failed to establish that respondent's conduct breached any mandatory school rule or directive by a supervisor."An examination of each of the six observation reports that accompanied my U-rating will clearly reveal that no instructions or directives had been given to me, but rather suggestions.10/24/03 observation by Assistant Principal:"During future visits to your classes, I look forward to observing your implementation of the suggested strategies that we have discussed."12/1/03 joint observation by Principal and Assistant Principal:"During future visits to your classes, I look forward to observing your implementation of the suggested strategies that we have discussed."12/22/03 observation by Assistant Principal:"During future visits to your classes, I look forward to observing your implementation of the suggested strategies that we have discussed."3/15/04 observation by Assistant Principal:"During future visits to your classes, I look forward to observing your implementation of the suggested strategies that we have discussed."5/13/04 joint observation by Principal and Assistant Principal:"During future visits to your classes, I look forward to observing your implementation of the suggested strategies that we have discussed."6/7/04 observation by Ben Waxman Regional Instructional Supervisor:"During future visits to your classroom, I look forward to observing your implementation of the strategies and methodologies suggested and discussed."It is quite clear that if the Principal, AP, and Regional Instructional Supervisor were genuinely dissatisfied with my teaching service, then they had an obligation to give me directions or instructions as to what to do, but not a series of suggestions.On January 25, 1989, (at the time) Commissioner of Education Thomas Sobol determined Appeal of Board of Education of the City School District of the City of New York(28 EDR 302).Commissioner Sobol stated on page 303:"After 16 days of hearing, the hearing panel unanimously recommended dismissal of all charges. The panel found that while respondent is not a 'good' teacher; is boring; does not consistently follow district policy; and maintains a narrow structured point of view in conducting his classroom; his performance did not fall below the minimal level expected of a 'reasonable teacher.' The panel found that respondent had a minimal level of competency to communicate facts; that he had knowledge of subject matter content; that he could motivate and interest students; that he maintained a classroom environment reasonably conducive to learning; and that he had an ability to assess and evaluate student performance. Based upon its assessment of these factors, the panel unanimously agreed that respondent had met the minimum level of competency which should be expected of a 'reasonable teacher.' The panel also unanimously rejected the charges of neglect of duty. The panel determined that there was no evidence that respondent did not fulfill his obligations, nor that he was unprepared to teach or that his lesson-plans or records were in any form of disarray.""The panel, in a commentary on respondent's teaching and questioning techniques, stated that there were no absolutes in teaching, and that respondent had to be evaluated for effectiveness. The panel decision notes the fact that respondent's students fared at least as well or better than the students of other teachers in the science department during the period covered by the charges."At page 305, then Commissioner Sobol stated:"The issue of incompetency however is a more difficult one. In a classroom situation, incompetence in its simplest terms means that a teacher is unable to provide a valid educational experience for those students assigned to his classroom. The record before me supports the panel's conclusion that petitioner also failed to prove this charge by a preponderance of the credible evidence. While I do not feel that it should be the determining factor in every case, the performance of respondent's students on the regents examinations in both earth science and biology indicates that respondent's students did as well as or better than the students in similar classrooms in the same school. There is no evidence in the record that respondent's students were substantially different in academic ability than students assigned to other teachers in similar classes, or that any other factor outside of respondent's classroom influenced their performance on the examinations. This tends to support the panel's finding that respondent was able to educate his students. It is also my finding that respondent provided a plausible explanation for the decisions which he made concerning the conduct of his classes and his methods of instruction. Weighing all of these factors, it is my conclusion that petitioner has failed to prove by a preponderance of the credible evidence that respondent is an incompetent teacher."Chancellor Klein, on page 1 of the March 2004 issue of Connections (Volume 1, Issue 1), a Department of Education / Teacher Communication Exchange, you stated:"On the other hand, I don't support some of the practices that you told me about in some of your emails to me. Whether a 'mini-lesson' lasts for 10 or 12 minutes should be left to the professional judgment of the teacher, as should the decision about how and where children sit in their classrooms. Some of you have mentioned your concerns about bulletin boards. In my view, bulletin boards are important: by demonstrating student work, they set a tone in the school that can support learning. At the same time, we shouldn't become overly preoccupied with bulletin boards, and some of your emails suggest this may sometimes be happening. Effective management, like effective teaching, is a skill that can be learned and we are working to help all staff improve their management skills. Indeed, that is a key reason that we have developed our path-breaking Leadership Academy. I have also discussed these concerns with our Superintendents and I am confident that they will be reviewing management practices at the school level to ensure that teachers are given appropriate professional latitude."Chancellor Klein, if you will compare your statement against the advice, criticisms, evaluations, and recommendations that were set forth in the six observation reports that the Principal submitted as her allegedly "appropriate supporting data," you will surely realize that I was not being given "appropriate professional latitude."Chancellor Klein, on April 20, 2004, your opinion column entitled, "Give the Schools to the Mayor" was published in the Washington Post. In the column, you noted:"The ability to transform a public education system begins with a concept central to any successful enterprise, public or private -- accountability. And as we have seen, accountability can be little more than a cynical punch line in a system that disperses control of such critical educational functions as budget, management, and curriculum through a network of localized, politically driven, semi-independent school boards able to set, follow or ignore their own rules."Principal Zwillenberg demonstrated a remarkable lack of accountability when she made the conclusional allegation that my teaching service was "unsatisfactory." She demonstrated this same lack of accountability when she did not apply the Commissioner's Regulations to my annual professional performance review. Instead of following the Commissioner's Regulations, she appeared to have made up her own rule that a mathematics teacher is to be given a suggestion to follow the Region 5 Mathematics Prototype, and that if the suggestion isn't followed, the end result will be a U-rating.Mrs. Zwillenberg is known for sending out "mixed signals." On January 15, 2004, a date of bitterly cold, snowy weather, she sent me a letter which stated:"Please accept my appreciation for your attendance at school today. I am certainly aware of the tremendous hardship involved in traveling during this morning's severely inclement weather.""Once here, we witnessed a monumental effort of team cooperation by all.""On behalf of the Administration and the students whom we serve, thank you, Mr. Farrell. Your dedication and commitment to the students of John Adams are certainly admirable."It must be emphasized here that Mrs. Zwillenberg did not support her allegation that my teaching service was "unsatisfactory" by a recital of any statistical data or factual data. In addition, Mrs. Zwillenberg did not submit any instructions to staff that affect the public, provisions of the Education Law, Regulations of the Board of Regents, Commissioner's Regulations, Chancellor's Regulations, or Bylaws of the Panel for Educational Policy that I allegedly violated.§100.2(o)(2)(iii)(b)(5) of the Commissioner's Regulations states:"Training in performance evaluation. The plan shall describe how the school district or BOCES provides 