Editor’s note: This article was updated to remove information that San Jose was using ShotSpotter. That was incorrect. Last updated Feb. 15 at 11:04 a.m.

When a representative for ShotSpotter, a Fremont-based company that claims its technology helps police detect where gunshots are coming from to accelerate response time to shootings, made his sales pitch to the Hollister City Council on Jan. 17, Councilwoman Dolores Morales questioned the project and asked that the process slow down so staff could look at other companies that provide similar products.

Mayor Mia Casey, along with Councilmembers Rick Perez and Tim Burns, indicated they were ready to move forward to approve the technology for $50,000 a year for one-square-mile of coverage. Councilmember Rolan Resendiz was not present. City Manager Brett Miller said there is no date set to bring ShotSpotter back to the council for consideration. Hollister Police Chief Carlos Reynoso told BenitoLink on Feb. 8 that he is still reaching out to other city police departments researching the system.

The proposed coverage includes the west and northeast parts of the city. (see map)

According to ShotSpotter, the technology uses a network of acoustic sensors to accurately identify and locate the source of gunfire. The data then is analyzed by staff at ShotSpotter’s review center before confirming it’s a gunshot and publishing it for police. The system is designed, the company claims, to help law enforcement respond quickly to active-shooter situations, and to reduce crime and shootings in general.

The main selling point of ShotSpotter is its accuracy. The system reportedly is able to detect gunshots with a high degree of precision, 97% accuracy, and can pinpoint the source of the gunfire to within a few feet.

ShotSpotter says its system can also be used to respond to other types of gunfire, such as celebratory shots during holidays or gang-related shootings, and that it helps reduce crime in general by providing real-time information about gunfire in a given area, allowing police to deploy resources more intelligently.

Despite its stated benefits, ShotSpotter is not without its drawbacks, the first being its cost. According to a technology study published in Police Chief magazine, acoustic gunshot detection systems (AGDS) such as ShotSpotter, “leads to a substantial increase in the total number of ‘shots fired’ calls, costing departments additional resources in response time. Whereas AGDS calls were handled more quickly overall, there is no statistical difference in the time it took officers reaching the scene.”

The report also stated, “Typical vendor costs for AGDS are around $65,000 to $90,000 per mile per year, but these vendor costs do not account for the increases in call volume agencies may experience, nor for any losses of efficiency in the response.”

A 2021 study conducted by the MacArthur Justice Center of over 40,000 dispatches in an under two-year period in Chicago found that 89% of dispatches resulted in no gun-related crime, and 86% resulted in no reports of crime at all.

The American Civil Liberties Union, which has expressed concerns about the use of the technology, argues that it raises privacy concerns, as it records and collects data on all sounds in a given area, not just gunfire.

The ACLU claims ShotSpotter is deployed overwhelmingly in communities of color, which “already disproportionately bears the brunt of a heavy police presence. The police say they pick neighborhoods for deployment based on where the most shootings are, but there are several problems with that.”

ACLU also claimed that “ShotSpotter false alarms send police on numerous trips into communities for no reason and on high alert expecting to potentially confront a dangerous situation.”

While some raise concerns about gunshot detection technology, Oakland police say it has been beneficial for its department.

According to the Oakland Police Department spokesperson Kim Armstead, the Oakland City Council authorized the ShotSpotter system in July 2006. From 2016 through 2022, the department has paid $4,600,842 for ShotSpotter, she said.

OPD chose to install the sensors in areas most prone to gunshots based upon historical data. Amstead said in 2021 there were 8,922 unique gunshot incidents and 99% were not called in to 911. Without ShotSpotter, she said, OPD would not have responded “in a timely fashion.”

The police department releases a weekly ShotSpotter activity report.

“Staff believe that there were many more cases where OPD responded to activations and found shooting victims—and where critical medical attention was provided,” she said. “The 86 cases (76 injury cases) are the ones where OPD and ShotSpotter staff can conclusively cite the response to the ShotSpotter activations.”

ShotSpotter claims it has deployed its system in 135 cities nationwide but does not list them or how many there are in California. BenitoLink found their systems are in Bakersfield, Salinas, Fresno, San Francisco, Oakland, Richmond, San Pablo, and Stockton. The Vallejo City Council voted in June 2022 to delay approving the system after the city’s police chief asked for 80 to 100 of the devices to be installed in the city.

San Francisco has had ShotSpotter since 2012. In a surveillance impact study (see PDF), SFPD found that, “Only 15% of gunshot incidents in SF have an accompanying 911 call. Without ShotSpotter there would be no police response to 85% of gun crime representing over 850 incidents. However, with ShotSpotter, virtually all incidents are captured with an exact location enabling the department to better protect and serve the community.”

The study also found there were both financial and time savings.

“If a 911 caller reports a gunshot incident, it usually takes several minutes to capture and relay the information to officers often with imprecise data on the exact location. With ShotSpotter, officers receive alerts within 60 seconds of trigger pull with closest address data enabling a faster response to a crime scene to potentially save victims. Officers can approach a crime scene more safely with ShotSpotter alerts knowing the precise location and time of the event and whether there are multiple shooters or high-capacity weapons being used.”

We need your help. Support local, nonprofit news! BenitoLink is a nonprofit news website that reports on San Benito County. Our team is committed to this community and providing essential, accurate information to our fellow residents. It is expensive to produce local news and community support is what keeps the news flowing. Please consider supporting BenitoLink, San Benito County’s public service, nonprofit news.. ShotSpotter Employees Not Only Have The Power To Alter Gunshot Reports, But Do It Nearly 10% Of The Time

from the cooperating...-or-conspiring? dept

What’s being presented by ShotSpotter as good news for people who feel they’ve been wrongly accused, doesn’t actually appear to be all that comforting.

ShotSpotter’s mic tech and AI combine forces to report possible gunshots to law enforcement customers. It’s very hit or miss, he said with all possible puns intended. ShotSpotter says it’s nearly 100% accurate and can play an important part in reducing gun crime.

Actual customers say something else:

A 2013 investigation of the effectiveness of ShotSpotter in Newark, New Jersey revealed that from 2010 to 2013, the system’s sensors alerted police 3,632 times, but only led to 17 actual arrests. According to the investigation, 75% of the gunshot alerts were false alarms.

97% accuracy? Not what we’ve seen, says the San Diego PD:

A San Diego Police Department spokesperson told Voice of San Diego that during the four years ShotSpotter had been in use (as of September 2020) officers had made only two arrests responding to an alert and only one of those was directly linked to the alert. Meanwhile, 72 of the 584 ShotSpotter alerts during that time period were determined to be unfounded, “a whopping 25 times higher than the 0.5 percent false positive rate put forth by the company,” the Voice of San Diego reported, based on data provided by the city’s police department.

Accuracy aside, can it help reduce gun violence and criminal acts linked to fired weapons? Again, the answer is no.

The City of Chicago Office of Inspector General’s (OIG) Public Safety section has issued a report on the Chicago Police Department’s (CPD) use of ShotSpotter acoustic gunshot detection technology and CPD’s response to ShotSpotter alert notifications. OIG concluded from its analysis that CPD responses to ShotSpotter alerts can seldom be shown to lead to investigatory stops which might have investigative value and rarely produce evidence of a gun-related crime.

That doesn’t mean the Chicago PD doesn’t think the tech is useful. In Chicago, officers still like ShotSpotter despite its inaccuracy because it allows them to do the sorts of things they want to do.

In reviewing ISR [investigative stop report] narratives for mentions of ShotSpotter alerts, OIG also identified 10 ISRs (13.9%) in which reporting officers referred to the aggregate results of the ShotSpotter system as informing their decision to initiate a stop or their course of action during the stop, even when they were not responding to a specific ShotSpotter alert. For example, some officers during the reporting period identified the fact of being in an area known to have frequent ShotSpotter alerts as an element of the reasonable suspicion required to justify the stop. Other officers reported conducting “protective pat downs” following a stop because they knew themselves to be in areas where ShotSpotter alerts were frequent.

A new Associated Press report — based on confidential ShotSpotter records shared with the news agency — is full of the sort of good news/bad news that tends to get saddled with noncommittal headlines, like this one: “Confidential document reveal key human role in gunshot tech.”

Here’s what’s notable in this report:

[A] confidential ShotSpotter document obtained by The Associated Press outlines something the company doesn’t always tout about its “precision policing system” — that human employees can quickly overrule and reverse the algorithm’s determinations, and are given broad discretion to decide if a sound is a gunshot, fireworks, thunder or something else. Such reversals happen 10% of the time by a 2021 company account, which experts say could bring subjectivity into increasingly consequential decisions and conflict with one of the reasons AI is used in law-enforcement tools in the first place — to lessen the role of all-too-fallible humans.

The AP is technically correct. ShotSpotter says its tech can do what police can’t: be omnipresent with ears at the ready. What it pitches to cop shops is near perfection, a 97% success rate in hearing and locating gunshots.

What’s not made immediately clear is the human backstops. This is absolutely essential. Loud noises should not be instantly assumed to be gunshots. Hence the need for trained human employees to sort the “possibles” from the “confirmed.”

But there’s a downside to this — one that’s just as harmful as some PDs’ willingness to treat every suspected gunshot as blanket permission to violate the rights of those who happen to be in the reported vicinity. ShotSpotter’s human techs don’t just alter reports to distinguish things like a car’s backfiring from a suspected criminal’s gun firing. They also alter determinations and gunshot locations to better serve the needs of law enforcement agencies that interact with them.

On one hand, we have humans looking for AI errors. On the other hand, we have humans willing to cater to their law enforcement customers. A real land of contrasts sort of situation and one that doesn’t exactly inspire more trust in a cop tech company that has routinely overstated the accuracy of its main product.

Unsurprisingly, ShotSpotter execs remain bullish.

ShotSpotter said in a statement to the AP that the human role is a positive check on the algorithm and the “plain-language” document reflects the high standards of accuracy its reviewers must meet. “Our data, based on the review of millions of incidents, proves that human review adds value, accuracy and consistency to a review process that our customers—and many gunshot victims—depend on,” said Tom Chittum, the company’s vice president of analytics and forensic services.

This is undoubtedly true. Human reviewers can make judgment calls the software can’t. This can help limit false positives. On the other hand, we’ve seen evidence that ShotSpotter’s human reviewers are not nearly as well-trained as the company claims. Their experts are not really experts. And, in at least two cases, the human reviewers have engaged in the sort of customer service that guarantees repeat government business (altering reports to better fit police narratives) but does little to protect the people who actually pay for these services: residents of cities where the tech has been deployed.

If ShotSpotter’s human staffers are altering gunshot reports 10% of the time, it means the software isn’t as accurate as the company claims it is. And it likely means they’re still altering reports by request for law enforcement agencies which may feel a false positive needs to be treated as an actual positive or feel the detection was too far away from their rights violations to be useful in their post hoc rationalization of their abuses.

Whatever the case, ShotSpotter should be treated with far more skepticism than what’s observed in this AP report. The company asserts facts not in evidence, sues journalists for truthfully reporting on its activities, and clearly considers itself to be an essential part of the criminal justice equation. Until the company is willing to let outside experts examine its tech, the company should be treated as part of the problem, rather than a cheap and easy solution to gun crime.

Filed Under: ai, altered reports, gunshot detection

Companies: shotspotter. (Updated below)

A critical report on the ShotSpotter gunshot detection system issued today by the City of Chicago’s Inspector General (IG) is the latest indication of deep problems with the gunshot detection company and its technology, including its methodology, effectiveness, impact on communities of color, and relationship with law enforcement. The report questioned the “operational value” of the technology and found that it increases the incidence of stop and frisk tactics by police officers in some neighborhoods.

The IG’s report follows a similarly critical report and legal filing by the Northwestern School of Law’s MacArthur Justice Center and devastating investigative reporting by Vice News and the Associated Press. Last week, the AP profiled Michael Williams, a man who spent a year in jail on murder charges based on evidence from ShotSpotter before having his charges dismissed when prosecutors admitted they had insufficient evidence against him.

Shotspotter installs 20 to 25 microphones per square mile in the cities where it is installed, and uses those microphones to try to identify and locate the sound of gunshots. In the past, we have scrutinized this company and its technology from a privacy perspective. Placing live microphones in public places raises significant privacy concerns. After looking at the details of ShotSpotter’s system, we didn’t think it posed an active threat to privacy, but we were concerned about the precedent it set (and others agreed).

But aural privacy is not the main problem with ShotSpotter, it turns out. There are several other very significant civil liberties problems with the technology.

First, as the MacArthur Justice Center details, ShotSpotter is deployed overwhelmingly in communities of color, which already disproportionately bear the brunt of a heavy police presence. The police say they pick neighborhoods for deployment based on where the most shootings are, but there are several problems with that:

ShotSpotter false alarms send police on numerous trips (in Chicago, more than 60 times a day) into communities for no reason and on high alert expecting to potentially confront a dangerous situation. Given the already tragic number of shootings of Black people by police, that is a recipe for trouble.

Indeed, the Chicago IG’s analysis of Chicago police data found that the “perceived aggregate frequency of ShotSpotter alerts” in some neighborhoods leads officers to engage in more stops and pat downs.

The placement of sensors in some neighborhoods but not others means that the police will detect more incidents (real or false) in places where the sensors are located. That can distort gunfire statistics and create a circular statistical justification for over-policing in communities of color.

Second, ShotSpotter’s methodology is used to provide evidence against defendants in criminal cases, but isn’t transparent and hasn’t been peer-reviewed or otherwise independently evaluated. That simply isn’t acceptable for data that is used in court.

The company’s sensors automatically send audio files to human analysts when those sensors detect gunshot-like sounds. Those analysts then decide whether the sounds are gunshots or other loud noises such as firecrackers, car backfires, or construction noises. They also triangulate the timing of when sounds reach different microphones to try to establish a location for the noise, and if it is believed to be the sound of gunshot, they make an effort to figure out how many shots were fired and what kind of gun is involved (such as a pistol versus a fully automatic weapon).

ShotSpotter portrays all of this as a straightforward and objective process, but it is anything but. Vice News and the AP note examples of the company’s analysts changing their judgments on all of the above types of results (which ShotSpotter disputes). In addition, the company uses AI algorithms to assist in the analysis — and as with all AI algorithms, that raises questions about reliability, transparency, and the reproducibility of results. The company turned down a request by the independent security technology research publication IPVM to carry out independent tests of its methodologies.

Further calling into question the appropriateness of ShotSpotter evidence for use in court is a third problem: the company’s apparent tight relationship with law enforcement. A ShotSpotter expert admitted in a 2016 trial, for example, that the company reclassified sounds from a helicopter to a bullet at the request of a police department customer, saying such changes occur “all the time” because “we trust our law enforcement customers to be really upfront and honest with us.” ShotSpotter also uses reports from police officers as “ground truth” in training its AI algorithm not to make errors. A close relationship between ShotSpotter and police isn’t surprising — police departments are the company’s customers and the company needs to keep them happy. But that isn’t compatible with the use of its tool as “objective data” used to convict people of crimes.

Finally, still up for debate is whether ShotSpotter’s technology is even effective. We can argue over a technology’s civil liberties implications until the end of time, but if it’s not effective there’s no reason to bother. A number of cities have stopped using the technology after deciding that ShotSpotter creates too many false positives (reporting gunshots where there were none) and false negatives (missing gunshots that did take place). The MacArthur Justice Center’s report found that in Chicago, initial police responses to 88.7 percent of ShotSpotter alerts found no incidents involving a gun. The company disputes whether this means its technology is inaccurate, pointing out that someone can shoot a gun but leave no evidence behind. But a review of the accuracy debate by IPVM concluded that “while public data does not enable a definitive estimation of false alerts,” the problem “is likely significantly greater than what ShotSpotter insinuates” because the company “uses misleading assumptions and a misleading accuracy calculation” in their advertised accuracy rates.

Given all of these problems, communities and the police departments serving them should reject this technology, at least until these problems are addressed, including through full transparency into its operation and efficacy.

Update (10/14/21):

Shotspotter CEO Ralph Clarke reached out to us to vigorously dispute the sources of information that we relied upon for this post, and also pushed back on the company’s critics in a piece published last month in the Buffalo News. Most recently, his company filed a defamation lawsuit against Vice News; their complaint is a voluminous argument for the company’s technology. Two points in particular seem worth highlighting:

First, pressed on reports that the company has changed its evaluation of the details of gunshots in court, Clarke told me that the company provides two kinds of data about gunshots: an initial, real-time alert sent to police shortly after a gunshot is detected, and a much more thorough “detailed forensic report” that is prepared for court cases. Clarke said that what has been reported as Shotspotter “changing its story” reflects the differences between the real-time and detailed forensic reports.

Second, one of the elements in the reporting on Shotspotter that alarmed me the most were references to the fact that the company was using AI as part of its system. The use of evidence in court derived from AI algorithms raises severe issues of transparency, accuracy, and fairness. Clarke said that they have algorithms that are used to “do the math” in triangulating the location of gunshots based on the timing of acoustic data from their sensors but, pressed on what that meant, he said they are not opaque deep-learning black boxes, but simply algorithms doing math that could otherwise be done by hand. Clarke said a more complex AI algorithm is used to filter out “pops, booms, and bangs” picked up by the company’s sensors that are believed to actually be gunshots before the audio is sent to human analysts for review. That’s not as much of a concern; inaccuracies in such an algorithm might result in some missed gunshots but aren’t going to lead to unfair evidentiary judgments.

Clarke also pushed back on criticisms of Shotspotter’s efficacy and cost-benefit value. Those involve complex assessments of real-world data as well as value judgments that experts and communities will have to monitor, evaluate, and debate. As always, we don’t think any police technology should be deployed or used unless affected communities clearly want them.. Portland police cordon off a neighborhood after a shooting in this August 2021 file photo. Jonathan Levinson / OPB

Portland city officials last week quietly reversed course on a decision to avoid a competitive bid process and launch a gunshot detection pilot program with ShotSpotter, a company critics say dramatically oversells its capabilities.

THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor

Portland Director of Community Safety Stephanie Howard notified the Focused Intervention Team Community Oversight Group of the decision during the group’s Jan. 5 meeting.

“There have been other vendors who have expressed an interest in providing a proposal to the city on technology like Shotspotter… acoustic gunshot detection technology,” Howard told the oversight group. “We at the city are going to put out a request for proposals so that everyone has a fair shot at making their pitch for why their technology would be the best for a pilot.”

Portland Mayor Ted Wheeler initially greenlit the ShotSpotter pilot after the oversight group issued a 60-page report last July recommending the technology. The report leaned heavily on ShotSpotter funded research in completing its analysis.

Wheeler did not respond to emails asking what prompted the new approach.

Reporting by OPB also showed how ShotSpotter sales representatives cultivated close relationships with Portland police leadership. According to the oversight group’s chairperson, it was PPB “captains and lieutenants” who first suggested the group look into ShotSpotter and then helped usher the company through the sales process.

Portland Police Capt. James Crooker helped ShotSpotter Western Region director Terri Greene prepare her presentation for the oversight group and city officials.

The original plan came despite public records showing a ShotSpotter competitor had spent months trying to get city officials to consider their technology as well.

After not responding to several emails this fall, Howard told EAGL technology’s Joe Swan the city was not in a position to partner with them at this time.

THANKS TO OUR SPONSOR: Become a Sponsor

“If that changes in the future, we will be sure to reach out,” she wrote in a November email.

Instead of relying on microphones like ShotSpotter, EAGL’s detection technology, which was developed by the U.S. Department of Energy, senses the energy waves produced by a bullet moving through the air. The company says that means their sensors are far more reliable and won’t mistake loud noises like jackhammers or backfiring cars for gunshots, a common complaint from cities which have stopped using ShotSpotter.

ShotSpotter claims to have a 97% accuracy rate and a 0.5% false positive rate but other cities have failed to replicate those results. The San Diego police said that after 584 ShotSpotter alerts over four years, the department only made two arrests responding to ShotSpotter calls.

In a May email to Crooker, Portland Police Bureau Deputy Chief Mike Frome said Police Chief Chuck Lovell had heard numerous complaints from fellow chiefs in other cities. Frome said among those concerns was that ShotSpotter “will drive up calls for service for false alarms.”

Jonathan Manes, an attorney at the MacArthur Justice Center who has researched ShotSpotter said there has never been a study testing how easily or frequently ShotSpotter is triggered by noises that aren’t gunshots.

“The system has been on the market for more than 20 years and there is no published study or testing,” Manes told a Jan. 6 meeting of the Interfaith Peace and Action Collaborative, a community group working to address gun violence. “This is a really serious problem because everytime ShotSpotter triggers an alert, police are going out believing being told that they should expect to find somebody who is armed and potentially dangerous.”

But, Manes said, the reality is police don’t find evidence of gunfire on 90% of the ShotSpotter alerts they respond to.

“ShotSpotter… starts from an assumption that it’s 100% accurate,” Manes said. “And the only time it counts something as an error, is if the police department voluntarily sends a complaint to ShotSpotter, that ShotSpotter got it wrong and then ShotSpotter agrees that it got it wrong.”

ShotSpotter pushed back on MacArthur’s research in a November email to OPB.

“The MacArthur Justice Foundation has purposely confused reports of lower immediate physical evidence recovery rates after an alert to mean there was no gunfire,” Sam Klepper, Senior Vice President of Marketing & Product Strategy, wrote in an email. “However, linking an alert with evidence of a shooting can be challenging as some guns do not eject casings and those that do can eject haphazardly. In addition, a high number of alerts happen late at night making evidence collection difficult as well as engaging witnesses.”

Howard told the oversight group a request for proposals is expected to be posted in the next two weeks and then stay open for two weeks. The city will then narrow the pool to the top two submissions and the public will have a chance to offer input.

“Part of that process will include… a town hall and to invite feedback from the community, so that the vendors themselves can… present their proposals to the public and they can answer questions directly,” Howard said.

She said she hopes the 12-month pilot will begin in March.. It wastes officers’ time by prompting a response to shots fired calls that cannot be verified or are not gunfire.

It doesn’t result in more arrests or convictions.

It increases policing in historically overpoliced neighborhoods.

Microphones can record conversations of people in these neighborhoods.

(TNS) — A report came out last week that criticizes gunshot detection technology used by cities across the country - including Syracuse - as ineffective, wasting officers’ time and targeting overpoliced communities.The Surveillance Technology Oversight Project (STOP) released the report questioning the usefulness and cost of ShotSpotter, a gunshot detection technology used by police to try to identify and locate shots fired within certain areas.Syracuse police and the Onondaga County District Attorney’s Office officials, however, say Shotspotter has been a crucial tool in investigating shootings, in trials and in allocating officers since it was installed in 2017.“It is a tool in the toolbox,” said Syracuse police Lt. Matthew Malinowski. a spokesperson for the department. “There is no one solution to really combat gun violence.”The report’s major criticisms of Shotspotter are:In the report’s conclusion, STOP argues that there is not enough evidence that the technology effectively combats gun violence and it says cities should consider reinvesting the money to combat the root causes of gun violence.Despite criticisms, ShotSpotter is becoming more prolific in the United States. As of March 2022, the technology is used in at least 130 U.S. cities and towns, a 50% increase from 85 cities in 2018, according to the report by the New York City-based non-profit organization.Many cities, including Syracuse, invested money from the American Rescue Plan Act to install or expand the program. In 2021, Syracuse used $171,000 from the act to expand the technology into the city’s North Side Each year, the city spends just under $400,000 on the technology, Malinowski said.ShotSpotter uses microphones installed in certain areas of the city and audio software to try to identify potential gunshots. When a sound that may be a gunshot is registered by multiple microphones, a technician at the company will listen to the recording and verify whether it is a gunshot in under 60 seconds, according to ShotSpotter’s website.Once the sound is verified as a gunshot, the acoustic waves are triangulated and provide police with a location, the company said. The alert is sent out to police, either through 911 dispatches or an app on the officers’ phones.Inaccurate, waste of time or helpful tool?The report states that ShotSpotter has inaccuracies in its characterization of loud noises as gunshots and its location data.The accuracy of the location varies, Onondaga County Chief Assistant District Attorney Shaun Chase said. Chase said that sometimes the system works like “find my iPhone” while other times it only provides a general area.Malinowski said this is a major improvement when compared to shots fired incidents reported by citizens. Often people will report hearing gunshots a few blocks away which leads to larger crime scenes and more time spent searching for evidence, he said.Chase confirmed that sometimes sounds such as cars backfiring of fireworks could be mistaken for gunshots, but he said the same issues can arise when police rely on citizen reporting.Malinowski said that sometimes gunshot reports are ruled unfounded when no casings are found, but that is not a confirmation that no shots were fired in the area.Malinowski said he does not have the data to accurately describe the number of false reports by the system. He said he believes that despite the kinks in the system, the data provided is still invaluable to police.When police rely solely on citizens, many shots-fired incidents and shootings go unreported, Malinowski said. According to the ShotSpoters website, around 80% of shots fired incidents are unreported.Helps arrests, convictions?Another major concern raised in the report is the lack of evidence collection and arrests that stem from the deployment of officers to shots fired notifications, according to the report. According to a study of major cities utilizing the technology cited by the report, only one arrest is made for every 200 notifications.In an analysis of 50,000 ShotSpotter notifications in Chicago, 244 arrests were made and 152 guns were recovered according to the report. In Brockton, MA, the technology increased police activity but did not improve gun-related case resolutions, the report says.Malinowski said that although not every investigation leads to an arrest, the technology has been very helpful in locating guns utilized in multiple crimes.Police often collect casings that match those connected to other investigations, this helps investigators build cases and track down new leads on weapons that are being repeatedly used for violence, Malinowski said.Once arrests are made, the recording of gunshots provided by ShotSpotter can prove to be crucial in criminal trials, Chase said.The DA’s office frequently uses the recordings as evidence, Chase said. He said it is much more compelling to play the audio of the gunfire for a jury rather than have an evidence technician describe the scene.In some cases, the recordings can speak to motives in a crime, Chase said. Proving intention in shooting or homicide trials requires many factors. Chase used self-defense cases as an example.When a defendant is asserting self-defense, listening to the cadence of gunfire can inform investigators and a jury, he said. When a recording shows a short and rapid exchange of gunfire, that can point to a case of someone acting to defend themselves, he said. In contrast, if there are numerous shots fired over a long period of time by one person, that can indicate the action was intentional, he said.It is not the “smoking gun” but it can be a crucial piece of the evidence presented, Chase said.Overpoliced communities targeted, report saysSTOP argues that the historic overpolicing of these communities has produced crime data that disproportionately represents violence in these communities.In Syracuse, Shotspotter covers about 2.1 square miles of the city’s North Side centered around Lodi Street, Butternut Street, North Salina and parts of James Street and Teal Avenue, according to Chase and city officials.The technology also covers about 3.5 square miles of the South Side, primarily centered around South Geddes Street, Malinowski said.Both Malinowski and Chase said that the report’s assumptions ignore other socio-economic factors that lead to higher crime, such as poverty.The data provided by ShotSpotter can inform police what areas experience higher volumes of gunshots to better allocate officers, Malinowski said.Are mics recording people?As a surveillance oversight project, one of the STOP report’s largest concerns is the capacity for the ShotSpotter microphones to record conversations. The report argues that this is an invasive technology because the microphones are recording at all times.According to the report, a ShotSpotter engineer testified to the NYC Committee on Public Safety that the microphones have the potential to record conversions at a normal volume from up to 50 feet away.In 2007, a California court accepted a voice recording captured by ShotSpotter microphones as evidence in a murder trial, according to the report. In 2019, the company agreed to deny or challenge police demands for audio recordings that do not include gunshots on the recommendation of external auditors, according to the report.In Syracuse, police and investigators only receive the audio that includes gunshots, Chase said. Occasionally, screams and shouts are picked up in this audio but they are often inaudible, he said.On Thursday, Chase reviewed the last 12 recordings that were attached to notifications of shots fired in the ShotSpotter app, he said. The longest of those 12 recordings was six seconds long, he said.Law enforcement officials are not being provided with extensive clips of the audio recordings that would allow them to listen to conversions even though the microphones are capable of that, Chase said.ShotSpotter’s respondsSimone Jackenthal, a spokesperson for ShotSpotter, said that the STOP report presents misleading allegations.Over 80% of shots-fired incidents go unreported, so the company’s system provides police departments with faster response times and accurate incident locations, Jackenthal said.An independent review determined that the system has a 97% aggregate accuracy rate, Jackenthal said. ShotSpotter can notify police of nearly all outdoor gunfire, she said.In reference to privacy concerns, Jackenthal said that ShotSpotter has been independently audited multiple times. Oakland’s Privacy Advisory Commission has unanimously approved the use of ShotSpotter twice, she said.. Syracuse, N.Y. – A report came out last week that criticizes gunshot detection technology used by cities across the country - including Syracuse - as ineffective, wasting officers’ time and targeting overpoliced communities.

The Surveillance Technology Oversight Project (STOP) released the report questioning the usefulness and cost of ShotSpotter, a gunshot detection technology used by police to try to identify and locate shots fired within certain areas.

Syracuse police and the Onondaga County District Attorney’s Office officials, however, say Shotspotter has been a crucial tool in investigating shootings, in trials and in allocating officers since it was installed in 2017.

“It is a tool in the toolbox,” said Syracuse police Lt. Matthew Malinowski. a spokesperson for the department. “There is no one solution to really combat gun violence.”

The report’s major criticisms of Shotspotter are:

It wastes officers’ time by prompting a response to shots fired calls that cannot be verified or are not gunfire.

It doesn’t result in more arrests or convictions.

It increases policing in historically overpoliced neighborhoods.

Microphones can record conversations of people in these neighborhoods.

In the report’s conclusion, STOP argues that there is not enough evidence that the technology effectively combats gun violence and it says cities should consider reinvesting the money to combat the root causes of gun violence.

Despite criticisms, ShotSpotter is becoming more prolific in the United States. As of March 2022, the technology is used in at least 130 U.S. cities and towns, a 50% increase from 85 cities in 2018, according to the report by the New York City-based non-profit organization.

Many cities, including Syracuse, invested money from the American Rescue Plan Act to install or expand the program. In 2021, Syracuse used $171,000 from the act to expand the technology into the city’s North Side.

Each year, the city spends just under $400,000 on the technology, Malinowski said.

ShotSpotter uses microphones installed in certain areas of the city and audio software to try to identify potential gunshots. When a sound that may be a gunshot is registered by multiple microphones, a technician at the company will listen to the recording and verify whether it is a gunshot in under 60 seconds, according to ShotSpotter’s website.

Once the sound is verified as a gunshot, the acoustic waves are triangulated and provide police with a location, the company said. The alert is sent out to police, either through 911 dispatches or an app on the officers’ phones.

Inaccurate, waste of time or helpful tool?

The report states that ShotSpotter has inaccuracies in its characterization of loud noises as gunshots and its location data.

The accuracy of the location varies, Onondaga County Chief Assistant District Attorney Shaun Chase said. Chase said that sometimes the system works like “find my iPhone” while other times it only provides a general area.

Malinowski said this is a major improvement when compared to shots fired incidents reported by citizens. Often people will report hearing gunshots a few blocks away which leads to larger crime scenes and more time spent searching for evidence, he said.

Chase confirmed that sometimes sounds such as cars backfiring of fireworks could be mistaken for gunshots, but he said the same issues can arise when police rely on citizen reporting.

Malinowski said that sometimes gunshot reports are ruled unfounded when no casings are found, but that is not a confirmation that no shots were fired in the area.

Malinowski said he does not have the data to accurately describe the number of false reports by the system. He said he believes that despite the kinks in the system, the data provided is still invaluable to police.

When police rely solely on citizens, many shots-fired incidents and shootings go unreported, Malinowski said. According to the ShotSpoters website, around 80% of shots fired incidents are unreported.

Helps arrests, convictions?

Another major concern raised in the report is the lack of evidence collection and arrests that stem from the deployment of officers to shots fired notifications, according to the report. According to a study of major cities utilizing the technology cited by the report, only one arrest is made for every 200 notifications.

In an analysis of 50,000 ShotSpotter notifications in Chicago, 244 arrests were made and 152 guns were recovered according to the report. In Brockton, MA, the technology increased police activity but did not improve gun-related case resolutions, the report says.

Malinowski said that although not every investigation leads to an arrest, the technology has been very helpful in locating guns utilized in multiple crimes.

Police often collect casings that match those connected to other investigations, this helps investigators build cases and track down new leads on weapons that are being repeatedly used for violence, Malinowski said.

Once arrests are made, the recording of gunshots provided by ShotSpotter can prove to be crucial in criminal trials, Chase said.

The DA’s office frequently uses the recordings as evidence, Chase said. He said it is much more compelling to play the audio of the gunfire for a jury rather than have an evidence technician describe the scene.

In some cases, the recordings can speak to motives in a crime, Chase said. Proving intention in shooting or homicide trials requires many factors. Chase used self-defense cases as an example.

When a defendant is asserting self-defense, listening to the cadence of gunfire can inform investigators and a jury, he said. When a recording shows a short and rapid exchange of gunfire, that can point to a case of someone acting to defend themselves, he said. In contrast, if there are numerous shots fired over a long period of time by one person, that can indicate the action was intentional, he said.

It is not the “smoking gun” but it can be a crucial piece of the evidence presented, Chase said.

Overpoliced communities targeted, report says

STOP argues that the historic overpolicing of these communities has produced crime data that disproportionately represents violence in these communities.

In Syracuse, Shotspotter covers about 2.1 square miles of the city’s North Side centered around Lodi Street, Butternut Street, North Salina and parts of James Street and Teal Avenue, according to Chase and city officials.

The technology also covers about 3.5 square miles of the South Side, primarily centered around South Geddes Street, Malinowski said.

Both Malinowski and Chase said that the report’s assumptions ignore other socio-economic factors that lead to higher crime, such as poverty.

The data provided by ShotSpotter can inform police what areas experience higher volumes of gunshots to better allocate officers, Malinowski said.

Are mics recording people?

As a surveillance oversight project, one of the STOP report’s largest concerns is the capacity for the ShotSpotter microphones to record conversations. The report argues that this is an invasive technology because the microphones are recording at all times.

According to the report, a ShotSpotter engineer testified to the NYC Committee on Public Safety that the microphones have the potential to record conversions at a normal volume from up to 50 feet away.

In 2007, a California court accepted a voice recording captured by ShotSpotter microphones as evidence in a murder trial, according to the report. In 2019, the company agreed to deny or challenge police demands for audio recordings that do not include gunshots on the recommendation of external auditors, according to the report.

In Syracuse, police and investigators only receive the audio that includes gunshots, Chase said. Occasionally, screams and shouts are picked up in this audio but they are often inaudible, he said.

On Thursday, Chase reviewed the last 12 recordings that were attached to notifications of shots fired in the ShotSpotter app, he said. The longest of those 12 recordings was six seconds long, he said.

Law enforcement officials are not being provided with extensive clips of the audio recordings that would allow them to listen to conversions even though the microphones are capable of that, Chase said.

ShotSpotter’s responds

Simone Jackenthal, a spokesperson for ShotSpotter, said that the STOP report presents misleading allegations.

Over 80% of shots-fired incidents go unreported, so the company’s system provides police departments with faster response times and accurate incident locations, Jackenthal said.

An independent review determined that the system has a 97% aggregate accuracy rate, Jackenthal said. ShotSpotter can notify police of nearly all outdoor gunfire, she said.

In reference to privacy concerns, Jackenthal said that ShotSpotter has been independently audited multiple times. Oakland’s Privacy Advisory Commission has unanimously approved the use of ShotSpotter twice, she said.

Staff writer Anne Hayes covers breaking news, crime and public safety. Have a tip, a story idea, a question or a comment? You can reach her at ahayes@syracuse.com.. The New York City and Chicago police departments spend millions of dollars a year on gunshot detection technology that a privacy group argues is ineffective and invasive.

The departments pay ShotSpotter Inc. for technology that uses microphones and audio software to identify the sounds of gunshots in neighborhoods. But the technology hasn’t made an impact on gun violence and typically doesn’t result in investigatory leads, according to a new report from the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project, a nonprofit privacy organization.. State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington Washington D.C. West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Puerto Rico US Virgin Islands Armed Forces Americas Armed Forces Pacific Armed Forces Europe Northern Mariana Islands Marshall Islands American Samoa Federated States of Micronesia Guam Palau Alberta, Canada British Columbia, Canada Manitoba, Canada New Brunswick, Canada Newfoundland, Canada Nova Scotia, Canada Northwest Territories, Canada Nunavut, Canada Ontario, Canada Prince Edward Island, Canada Quebec, Canada Saskatchewan, Canada Yukon Territory, Canada

Zip Code. MacArthur Justice Center study finds City’s use of ShotSpotter is inaccurate, expensive and dangerous

CHICAGO – A new study of Chicago’s use of ShotSpotter, a surveillance system designed to detect gunfire, finds that the vast majority of alerts generated by the system turn up no evidence of gunfire or any gun-related crime. Instead, the ShotSpotter system sends police on thousands of unfounded and high-intensity deployments, which are focused almost exclusively in Black and Latinx communities. The complete findings of the study can be found at EndPoliceSurveillance.com.

“Surveillance technology has a veneer of objectivity, but many of these systems do not work as advertised,” said Jonathan Manes, an attorney with the MacArthur Justice Center, who spearheaded the study. “High-tech tools can create a false justification for the broken status quo of policing and can end up exacerbating existing racial disparities. We needed to know whether this system actually does what it claims to do. It does not.”

ShotSpotter blankets neighborhoods with microphones in order to attempt to detect and locate the source of gunfire. It sends alerts of supposed gunfire immediately to local police. ShotSpotter claims to be 97% accurate. However, ShotSpotter has not released any scientifically-valid study to substantiate that figure. There are also no studies testing whether ShotSpotter can reliably tell the difference between the sound of gunshots and other noises like firecrackers, backfiring cars, construction noises, helicopters, and other loud, impulsive sounds.

The study conducted by MacArthur Justice Center at Northwestern Pritzker School of Law reviewed ShotSpotter deployments for roughly 21 months (from July 1, 2019 through April 14, 2021) using data obtained from the City of Chicago. Their analysis found that 89% turned up no gun-related crime and 86% led to no report of any crime at all. In less than two years, there were more than 40,000 dead-end ShotSpotter deployments.

“Our findings are shocking,” said Manes. “The ShotSpotter system in Chicago prompts thousands of deployments by police hunting for gunfire in vain. This system puts police on high alert and sends them racing into communities; but almost nine times of our ten, the police don’t turn up evidence of gun crime or any crime at all. It creates a powderkeg situation for residents who just happen to be in the vicinity of a false alert.”

The study is also the basis of an amicus brief filed today in support of a motion by the Cook County Public Defender that challenges the scientific validity of the ShotSpotter system’s gunfire reports, which prosecutors have attempted to use as evidence in a criminal prosecution.

The amicus brief was submitted on behalf of a coalition of community-based organizations that are concerned about the impact of ShotSpotter on overpoliced and underresourced communities of color on the city’s South and West sides. Those organizations are Brighton Park Neighborhood Council, Lucy Parsons Labs, and Organized Communities Against Deportations (OCAD).

“Knowing very well that police officers tend to escalate all types of situations and are known to use excessive force, the ShotSpotter technology creates an additional layer of violent response from police officers as they rush aggressively to poor, Black & brown neighborhoods expecting to be met with gunfire,” Miguel Lopez, Membership Coordinator for OCAD. “If the city was really serious about stopping gun violence, they would listen to the community and use those $33 million dollars to invest in those communities in order to create the social environment where young people would have the transformative tools to deal with conflict.”

The City of Chicago has deployed ShotSpotter only in the police districts with the highest proportion of Black and Latinx residents. On an average day, there are more than 61 ShotSpotter-initiated police deployments that turn up no evidence of any crime, let alone gun crime. Neighborhoods that are surveilled by ShotSpotter are subject to thousands of additional, unfounded police deployments just because the ShotSpotter system is present.

Every unfounded ShotSpotter deployment creates an extremely dangerous situation for residents in the area. ShotSpotter primes police to believe that they are heading to a dangerous location where a person has just fired a gun. Any resident who happens to be in the vicinity of a ShotSpotter alert will be a target of police suspicion or worse. These volatile deployments can go wrong in an instant.

“Only residents in predominantly Black and Latinx neighborhoods have to contend with the burden of thousands of unnecessary and potentially dangerous police deployments,” said Manes. “Only their neighborhoods get saddled with inflated statistics about supposed gunfire. At the same time, there is no evidence that the ShotSpotter system makes communities safer or reduces crime.”

CPD publicly promotes ShotSpotter as an essential tool for crime prevention, but there is no evidence that it reduces crime. Academic studies of ShotSpotter and similar gunshot detection systems have found that they do not reduce the number of violent crimes and do not even reduce the number of confirmed shooting incidents identified by police. Instead, the studies find that the main effect of ShotSpotter is just to increase the number of times police are deployed.

The Chicago Police Department has a long history of excessive force, illegal and discriminatory stop-and-frisk, and other abusive policies and practices. ShotSpotter reinforces and may exacerbate this system of racialized policing.

CPD requires managers to incorporate ShotSpotter data into its CompStat reports, which are used to hold commanders accountable to performance targets. ShotSpotter data also feed into the city’s “predictive policing” technology. The inflated gunfire statistics generated by ShotSpotter in predominantly Black and Latinx neighborhoods will thus skew how the police allocates its resources, unless the city is taking careful steps to eliminate the effects of unfounded ShotSpotter alerts. These statistics can create a false “techwash” justification for racialized patterns of policing.

“Like many surveillance systems, CPD’s use of ShotSpotter trades on a veneer of objectivity but, in practice, it reinforces racial disparities in policing,” said Manes. “The City should be investing in communities and in solutions that work, not in police technologies that create faulty justifications for ever more policing.”

In 2018, the City of Chicago entered a $33 million, three-year contract with ShotSpotter. Over the past two years, the City has paid ShotSpotter about $10 million per year and spends untold additional resources on police officers chasing down tens of thousands of unfounded ShotSpotter alerts every year. The City of Chicago is one of ShotSpotter’s two largest customers, accounting for 18% of its annual revenue in 2020. The City of Chicago’s contract with ShotSpotter expires August 19, 2021 unless the city exercises its option to extend.

The complete findings of the study, including the legal brief filed in court, can be found at EndPoliceSurveillance.com.. . . . ShotSpotter uses acoustic sensors to detect gunshots. Credit: Amber Huff for Chicago Reader

In 2017, Chicago police began to slowly expand a vast network of microphones mounted atop lampposts and utility poles—the electronic ears of the controversial gunshot detection technology ShotSpotter. This coincided with the creation of newly established high-tech, district-level intelligence centers known as Strategic Decision Support Centers (SDSC), which were developed through a collaboration between the Chicago Police Department (CPD), the University of Chicago Crime Lab, and the federal Bureau of Justice Assistance.

If ShotSpotter and its sensors are the CPD’s metaphorical ears, then SDSCs are its brain—the centers cull and aggregate the tremendous amount of information police gather on the 2.7 million people who call Chicago home, and share that information with the central intelligence center at the department’s headquarters. Staffed by a mix of sworn officers and civilian crime analysts, these centers serve as command posts not only for officers responding in real-time to potential crimes, but also for police who use historical crime data to predict future incidents.

ShotSpotter was to be a core pillar of these state-of-the-art facilities and a remedy to the city’s persistent gun violence in beleaguered Black and Brown communities, which is perhaps why an analyst at one SDSC took a particular interest in the technology.

For at least nine months, between October 2017 and July 2018, Scott DeDore tracked ShotSpotter’s accuracy in identifying confirmed gunshots. DeDore regularly shared his findings with Chicago police and ShotSpotter, and even attempted to hone the tool’s precision by working alongside the company to install additional sensors, documents obtained through public records requests show. Over the course of those nine months, according to the records, ShotSpotter correctly detected a gunshot in 63 of 135 instances in which a person was struck, an accuracy rate of about 47 percent.

One month after DeDore sent his last available report, then mayor Rahm Emanuel signed a new three-year, $33 million contract with ShotSpotter (the company has since rebranded as SoundThinking). It covered 12 police districts—100 square miles—and made Chicago the company’s largest customer at the time.

These records represent a look into a small corner of Chicago’s southwest side from more than half a decade ago. But they offer a unique window into ShotSpotter and its role in an increasingly surveilled city. And they came at a time when the city was reinventing its policing strategy. Six years later, Chicago is again at a crossroad, as a new mayoral administration “reimagines” public safety and mulls the fate of ShotSpotter when its contract expires in mid-February.

A ShotSpotter device and POD camera in Englewood Credit: Madison Muller

SoundThinking did not answer a list of emailed questions from the Reader. In a written statement, Mark Page, the company’s senior vice president of field engineering and customer service, said ShotSpotter is used around the clock by more than 160 agencies across the country, “each with Service Level guarantees of 90% or more in terms of detection performance.” Page claimed the technology “consistently meets or exceeds this performance criteria” and said that SoundThinking incurs financial penalties “in the event that we fail to meet our performance commitments.”

Page also pointed to a report from consulting firm Edgeworth Economics that found ShotSpotter maintained a 97 percent accuracy rate over the past four years. That study, however, was commissioned by SoundThinking and only determined whether the system accurately identified a sound as a gunshot. Further, the study relied on data provided by ShotSpotter—which, itself, was reported to the company by police departments—rather than conduct its own testing of the technology.

Page said that most shootings aren’t reported to police. “In the time that it has been deployed in Chicago, ShotSpotter has led police to locate hundreds of gunshot wound victims where there was no corresponding call to 911. Those are victims who would not have received aid but for ShotSpotter.”

The CPD did not respond to a request for comment.

DeDore began as an analyst with the CPD in June 2017, according to his LinkedIn. He was assigned to the tenth district’s SDSC around the time the department was first unveiling the real-time crime centers and just a few months before ShotSpotter’s expansion into the southwest side region.

As the gunshot detection technology went live in his district in October 2017, DeDore began to scrupulously document its ability to accurately alert officers to “bona fide” shootings in which a person was hit. According to records obtained from the CPD, DeDore tracked his findings in spreadsheets that listed, for each incident: the date, time, and location of the shooting; whether notification of the incident came from 911 dispatchers at the city’s Office of Emergency Management and Communications (OEMC) or from ShotSpotter; the police beat in which the incident occurred; any evidence of a shooting; and whether the technology correctly alerted officers.

The technology’s accuracy varied greatly over the nine months of available data. In the period between March 19, 2018, and April 15, 2018, for example, ShotSpotter alerted police to nine of the ten instances where a person was shot in the tenth district. But it didn’t detect any of the six shootings between May 22, 2018, and June 11, 2018.

ShotSpotter’s accuracy using the data and time periods from DeDore’s analysis

Source: Chicago Police Department Credit: Amber Huff for Chicago Reader

In one of his first reports, on November 2, just a few weeks after ShotSpotter launched in the tenth district, he noted “13 MISSES with ground Evidence that occurred in the North End” of the district between October 16 and 30, 2017.

Further, DeDore found that from December 11, 2017 to February 11, 2018, ShotSpotter alerted the CPD to 65 percent of incidents when a person was shot in the tenth district. From February 12, 2018 to March 18, 2018, ShotSpotter alerted police to nine of the 17 incidents when a person was shot, a 53 percent accuracy rate.

It’s possible some of the shots occurred indoors and were, therefore, undetectable by ShotSpotter. When the CPD expanded ShotSpotter into the tenth district, the city’s then agreement with the company, which the Reader obtained from the Public Buildings Commission, stipulated the “system will be designed to detect at least 80% of the unsuppressed outdoor gunfire, with location accuracy to the shooter’s location within 25 meters in at least 80% of the incidents.”

DeDore regularly shared his findings in emails with dozens of police across multiple units within the CPD, including with members of the department’s brass. Recipients included dozens of sergeants and lieutenants, some in the district, others in units including the narcotics, internal affairs, gang enforcement, and education and training divisions, documents show.

These emails included PowerPoint presentations with data tables that tracked how ShotSpotter’s accuracy changed over time and maps that plotted the locations of undetected gunshots in the tenth district.

“I don’t know if everybody in the new SDSC rooms appreciates the importance of improving ShotSpotter. This can only be accomplished by accurately documenting their MISSES,” DeDore wrote in a February 22, 2018 email. “The city is paying for this it’s a phenomenal tool, let’s make it better!”

Documents also show DeDore shared his findings with various ShotSpotter representatives, and even worked with the company to increase the technology’s accuracy. On December 5, 2017, DeDore sent an email to Doris Cohen, at the time a customer success and training manager for ShotSpotter, according to her LinkedIn. (Cohen is now SoundThinking’s analytics director.) His email included an attached presentation that detailed an apparent conflict between the Latin Kings and Satan Disciples street gangs that had occurred a day earlier.

“On 4 December 2017, there were three conflict related shots fired incidents in the 010th district with no hits,” the presentation notes. “ShotSpotter did not alert on any of the incidents, but did capture audio on each incident.”

“This is a high priority conflict area that has repeated misses,” the analyst wrote in his email to Cohen. “Yesterday was a good example.”

ShotSpotter incident review center in 2019 Credit: Courtesy SoundThinking

In another instance, on January 8, 2018, DeDore forwarded Cohen an email with an accuracy report for the period spanning December 11, 2017 to January 7, 2018. Nine minutes later, DeDore received a reply from Jeff Magee, ShotSpotter’s customer success director until 2022, asking if the analyst was available for a meeting. DeDore responded with his availability, and Magee wrote back, “I will stop over Wednesday morning.”

A couple days later, on January 10, DeDore emailed colleagues an updated ShotSpotter accuracy report. The presentation notes, “ShotSpotter has increased microphone placement in the 010th district and made adjustments in December based on geographic mapping of the documented 62 MISSES.” In an email sent the following month, DeDore writes that “ShotSpotter made several trips here after I sent these reports. They then came and installed more microphones.”

But efforts to improve the technology’s accuracy in the tenth district over the course of the nine months of data proved relatively fruitless. Documents show the year-to-date accuracy rate remained below 50 percent for the entirety of the nine months of data.

It’s unclear just how high up the command chain DeDore’s analysis reached, or whether anyone in Emanuel’s office knew of the accuracy reports ahead of the 2018 contract extension. But the documents show at least some within the department’s leadership were aware of it. Then captain (now commander) Joseph Brennan and Commander James Sanchez were included in a March 20, 2018 email in which DeDore shared his analysis. DeDore, Brennan, and Sanchez appear to also have been invited to a meeting the same day—alongside other leadership like the then commanders of the ninth and 15th districts, Randall Darlin and Ernest Cato III—with ShotSpotter’s Magee and Mike Will, who an email identifies as the company’s vice president of service solutions. The meeting was about “Shotspotter Reported Misses and Service Enhancement,” documents show.

“I will map all recent MISSES before then,” DeDore wrote ahead of the meeting.

In July 2003, the CPD unveiled a pilot program that would install 30 remote controlled, 360-degree surveillance cameras on light posts in “Chicago’s most violence prone communities,” the department website notes, with the goal of “disrupting illegal narcotics operations.” Police credited these so-called police observation device (POD) cameras with cutting drug crimes by three-quarters during the summer of 2003.

By September, Mayor Richard M. Daley would take the program citywide. As the number of POD cameras grew—first from 30 to 80, eventually to thousands across the city—so, too, did their supposed capabilities. This phase marked the city’s first foray into gunshot detection. Second-generation POD cameras were equipped with technology from Tuscon, Arizona–based surveillance company Safety Dynamics that the CPD says could wirelessly transmit gunshot alerts to the OEMC, field control devices, district stations, and police headquarters.

Chicago’s first deal with ShotSpotter came in 2007. But it, along with the pilot from Safety Dynamics, were short lived. A Chicago police spokesperson told NBC Chicago in 2010 that the department dumped both programs because they were costly and “not entirely effective.”

The city gave ShotSpotter another go in 2012, this time reportedly financed with funds seized from civilians through a process known as civil asset forfeiture. Initially installed in just two of the more than 20 police districts—covering three square miles—ShotSpotter would soon wrap its tendrils around large swaths of Chicago. By September 2016, the technology’s footprint had grown to 13.5 square miles, after the Public Buildings Commission approved nearly $1 million in funding to cover the entire seventh and 13th districts—Englewood and Garfield Park—in sensors.

ShotSpotter analysts listen to alerts to determine whether the sound is a gunshot. Credit: Amber Huff for Chicago Reader

ShotSpotter’s growing coverage area accompanied the rollout of the department’s first two SDSCs, in the same districts, at the start of 2017. The investment in its real-time crime centers marked a shift in strategy for the CPD that centered on “inserting technologies into district-level centers,” according to a 2019 Rand Corporation report. The study notes Chicago police desired to “better integrate technology into CPD’s policies and practices,” leverage the “very large amount of information” it already maintained on Chicagoans, and address the real and persistent problem of gun violence.

SDSCs are small, converted conference rooms in district stations. They’re staffed by a team of two to four officers and civilian analysts per shift, and supervised by a sergeant or lieutenant. These centers include access to a bevy of technologies, including ShotSpotter, POD cameras, geospatial predictive policing software, and social network analysis, that police heralded as cutting-edge public safety tools.

In spring 2017, the CPD opened SDSCs in four additional districts, including DeDore’s tenth. By March of the following year, 13 districts would have SDSCs, with plans to eventually open one in every district.

The expansion of SDSCs and the introduction of new surveillance technology came at a time when the CPD faced a severe crisis of legitimacy. Decades of brutality, dismal clearance rates, the killings of Rekia Boyd and Laquan McDonald, and a federal investigation into a pattern of unconstitutional policing laid bare systemic issues within the department. An emphasis on high-tech policing, then, offered police an opportunity to rebrand.

City leaders from Emanuel to former Chicago police superintendent Eddie Johnson heralded ShotSpotter as part of a new wave of “data driven enforcement” that was central to bringing public safety to Chicago’s long divested and heavily segregated south and west sides. In announcing the opening of the tenth district’s SDSC in October 2017, Emanuel said the new focus on technology “is part of CPD’s commitment to a crime strategy that has made us smarter in our deployments, faster in our response times, and more proactive in our community engagement.”

At the same time, however, a member of that police department collected nine months of data that showed, at least in one district, in cases where a person was hit by gunfire, the technology missed as many shootings as it identified. None of the records provided to the Reader show police questioned the continued use of the technology. Instead, the department seemed resolute to maintain its relationship with the company.

Emanuel signed off on a three-year extension with ShotSpotter in August 2018. Johnson, in a press release from the company announcing the deal, made clear he thought the technology was here to stay. “ShotSpotter has been—and will continue to be—a key component in helping our agency rebuild trust with the communities that we are serving,” the superintendent said.

Chicago’s current ShotSpotter contract expires on February 16—but, even as the deadline looms on the horizon, Mayor Brandon Johnson has remained tight-lipped about its prospects, despite committing to end the city’s contract with the company as a candidate. Since taking office, his administration has sidestepped questions about the city’s future with the technology. He and other city officials have instead suggested that they are considering a range of options, but have so far declined to discuss specifics.

In June 2023, Chicago approved a $10 million payment to SoundThinking, according to the Chicago Sun-Times. Jason Lee, a top Johnson adviser, said at the time the payment was erroneously processed after former mayor Lori Lightfoot signed off on an extension through February 2024. South Side Weekly reported in November, however, that SoundThinking CEO Ralph Clark told investors Johnson “included funding for the continued use of acoustic gunshot detection technology” in his 2024 budget proposal, which the city council approved later that month. The budget includes a roughly $9 million line item for “Software Maintenance and Licensing.” That same expense also appeared in the 2023 budget.

Ronnie Reese, the mayor’s press secretary, repeatedly declined to make anyone available for an interview and would not comment on whether Johnson will end Chicago’s use of ShotSpotter when the contract expires or how the city plans to spend the $9 million allocated for it. When asked by the Reader if he could provide any information on the impending decision, Reese replied, “No updates.”

Meanwhile, more than 80 community groups and more than 500 people have signed an open letter calling on the Johnson administration to end the city’s relationship with ShotSpotter. “More than just being a waste of city resources,” the groups write, “the use of ShotSpotter results in deployments that are dangerous for Black and brown community members who historically have been killed, tortured, disappeared, and terrorized by CPD officers.”

The letter calls for greater investment into areas like housing, education, and health care. “Every penny invested in surveillance tools demonstrates a lack of confidence in community-led solutions to safety,” it says.

Whether the mayor stays true to his promise remains to be seen. But his top cop, Larry Snelling, might offer some insight. At a January community forum in Chinatown, Snelling, a longtime supporter of the gunshot detection technology, offered a full-throated defense of ShotSpotter and suggested that people who oppose it misunderstand how it works. “You tie sound detection to a lot of things it’s not tied to. You can read studies—and I can show you how it works,” the superintendent said. “Until you actually see it, you don’t understand.”

“Shot detection does one simple thing: it detects gunshots and it allows officers to get to those locations quicker.”