Russian payment services company Xsolla has fired 150 employees at once. What caused controversy wasn’t the staff reduction itself but the CEO’s letter, in which he tried to explain the reason behind this decision.

The email written by Xsolla CEO and founder Aleksandr Agapitov leaked on August 3. At first, some people suspected that it could have been fake, but its authenticity was later confirmed by some local game outlets and the company itself.

150 people were fired from the company’s office in Perm, Russia. Agapitov informed his employees that they were being let go via the letter saying that they have been terminated based on big data analysis of their activity.

Here’s the full translation of the email:

You received this email because my big data team analyzed your activities in Jira, Confluence, Gmail, chats, documents, dashboards and tagged you as unengaged and unproductive employees. In other words, you were not always present at the workplace when you worked remotely.

Many of you might be shocked, but I truly believe that Xsolla is not for you. Nadia and her care team partnered with seven leading HR agencies, as we will help you find a good place, where you will earn more and work even less. Sasha will help you get a recommendation, including the one from myself. And Natalia will read you your rights.

Once again, thank you for your contribution. If you want to stay in contact with me, please write me a long letter about all your observations, injustice, and gratitude.

In the end of the letter, Agapitov also shared a “list of those expelled.”

Agapitov later told App2Top.ru that Xsolla sometimes has to take difficult and unpopular measures to keep growing and evolving. “We want all our employees to think daily about how their actions and decisions affect the company’s fate and success because we have very ambitious goals in the coming years; it is one of Xsolla’s values and it is reflected in everything — from operating standards to compensation system,” he said, adding that all employees will receive compensation packages and help from HR agencies.

As a result, Xsolla faced backlash for what was perceived as secretly spying on its employees. Many people also criticized the letter’s tone.

According to Russian HR expert Alyona Vladimirskaya, using big data and AI in HR shouldn’t violate employees’ rights. “Measuring employees’ performance by their network time and engagement rather than by digitized work results is both outdated and extremely ineffective,” she said, also advising the dismissed employees to sue the company for its actions.

You might also want to check out our summary of Agapitov’ interview regarding the layoffs. And here’s what a laid-off Xsolla employee has to say about the situation.

Updated August 5, 6.58 a.m. PST: Aleksandr Agapitov, CEO and founder of Xsolla, held a press conference and explained that the mass layoffs are due to the fact that the company has stopped showing 40% growth. He also released another controversial statement on Twitter. More on that here.. 150 people have been fired from Xsolla – a game payment company used by Steam, the Epic Games Store and other game developers – via a controversial email from CEO and founder Aleksandr Agapitov.

Agapitov contacted 150 fired employees through email on August 3, stating that “my big data team analyzed your activities” and accused them of being “unengaged and unproductive employees”.

The email starts by saying:

“You received this email because my big data team analyzed your activities in Jira, Confluence, Gmail, chats, documents, dashboards and tagged you as unengaged and unproductive employees. In other words, you were not always present at the workplace when you worked remotely.”

Advertisement

Agapitov also states, “Many of you might be shocked, but I truly believe that Xsolla is not for you” and that employees would receive help through separate HR companies. The email ends by listing the names of everyone who has been fired, and says “If you want to stay in contact with me, please write me a long letter about all your observations, injustice, and gratitude”.

Въебывайте или уебывайте! — Shurick Agapitov (@agapitovs) August 4, 2021

All of the fired employees were based in Xsolla’s office in Perm, Russia. In a follow-up press conference reported by App2Top, Agapitov claimed that the layoffs were due to the company no longer showing 40 per cent growth.

Recommended

After the press conference, Agapitov posted a Tweet which Game World Observer reports as translating to “Work your fucking ass off or get your fucking ass out”.

Xsolla has been accused of spying on employees to gather the metrics they were judged on – HR expert Alyona Vladimirskaya has argued that monitoring productivity like this is “extremely ineffective” and encourages fired employees to sue.

Xsolla provides payment services for large companies in the games industry, including Valve, Twitch, Epic Games and Ubisoft.

Advertisement

In other news, Darksiders III is coming to the Nintendo Switch next month.