Google developed its Cloud Natural Language API to give customers a language analyzer that could, the internet giant claimed, "reveal the structure and meaning of your text." Part of this gauges sentiment, deeming some words positive and others negative. When Motherboard took a closer look, they found that Google's analyzer interpreted some words like "homosexual" to be negative. Which is evidence enough that the API, which judges based on the information fed to it, now spits out biased analysis.

The tool, which you can sample here, is designed to give companies a preview of how their language will be received. Entering whole sentences gives predictive analysis on each word as well as the statement as a whole. But you can see whether the API gauges certain words to have negative or positive sentiment, on a -1 to +1 scale, respectively.

Motherboard had access to a more nuanced analysis version of Google's Cloud Natural Language API than the free one linked above, but the effects are still noticeable. Entering "I'm straight" resulted in a neutral sentiment score of 0, while "I'm gay" led to a negative score of -0.2 and "I'm homosexual" had a negative score of -0.4.

AI systems are trained using texts, media and books given to it; Whatever the Cloud Natural Language API ingested to form its criteria to evaluate English text for sentiment, it biased the analysis toward negative attribution of certain descriptive terms. Google didn't confirm to Motherboard what corpus of text it fed the Cloud Natural Language API. Logically, even if it started with an isolated set of materials with which to understand sentiments, once it starts absorbing content from the outside world...well, it gets polluted with all the negative word associations found therein.

Google confirmed to Motherboard that its NLP API is producing biased results in the aforementioned cases. Their statement reads:

"We dedicate a lot of efforts to making sure the NLP API avoids bias, but we don't always get it right. This is an example of one of those times, and we are sorry. We take this seriously and are working on improving our models. We will correct this specific case, and, more broadly, building more inclusive algorithms is crucial to bringing the benefits of machine learning to everyone."

There are clear parallels with Microsoft's ill-fated and impressionable AI chatbot Tay, which the company quickly pulled offline in March 2016 after Twitter users taught it to be extremely a hideously racist and sexist conspiracy theorist. Back in July, the computer giant tried again with its bot Zo, which similarly learned terrible habits from humans, and was prompty shut down.

Users had to deliberately corrupt those AI chatbots, but Google's Cloud Natural Language API is simply repeating the sentiments it gains by absorbing text from human contributions...wherever they're coming from.. Google messed up, and now says it's sorry. Google messed up, and now says it's sorry.

Wednesday, Motherboard Wednesday, Motherboard published a story written by Andrew Thompson about biases against ethnic and religious minorities encoded in one of Google's machine learning application program interfaces (APIs), called the Cloud Natural Language API.

Part of the API analyzes texts and then determines whether they have a positive or negative sentiment, on a scale of -1 to 1. The AI was found to label sentences about religious and ethnic minorities as negative, indicating it's inherently biased. It labeled both being a Jew and being a homosexual as negative, for example. Part of the API analyzes texts and then determines whether they have a positive or negative sentiment, on a scale of -1 to 1. The AI was found to label sentences about religious and ethnic minorities as negative, indicating it's inherently biased. It labeled both being a Jew and being a homosexual as negative, for example.

Advertisement

Google has now vowed to fix the problem. In response to Motherboard's story, a spokesperson from the company said it was working to improve the API and remove its biases. Google has now vowed to fix the problem. In response to Motherboard's story, a spokesperson from the company said it was working to improve the API and remove its biases.

"We dedicate a lot of efforts to making sure the NLP [Natural Language Processing] API avoids bias, but we don't always get it right. This is an example of one of those times, and we are sorry. We take this seriously and are working on improving our models," a Google spokesperson said in an email. "We will correct this specific case, and, more broadly, building more inclusive algorithms is crucial to bringing the benefits of machine learning to everyone." "We dedicate a lot of efforts to making sure the NLP [Natural Language Processing] API avoids bias, but we don't always get it right. This is an example of one of those times, and we are sorry. We take this seriously and are working on improving our models," a Google spokesperson said in an email. "We will correct this specific case, and, more broadly, building more inclusive algorithms is crucial to bringing the benefits of machine learning to everyone."

Artificially intelligent systems are trained by processing vast amounts of data, often including books, movie reviews, and news articles. Google's AI likely learned to be biased against certain groups because it was fed biased data. Issues such as these are at the core of AI and machine learning research, and those critical of such technologies say they need to be fixed in order to ensure tech works for everyone. Artificially intelligent systems are trained by processing vast amounts of data, often including books, movie reviews, and news articles. Google's AI likely learned to be biased against certain groups because it was fed biased data. Issues such as these are at the core of AI and machine learning research, and those critical of such technologies say they need to be fixed in order to ensure tech works for everyone.

This This isn't the first example of AI bias to be uncovered, and it likely won't be the last. Researchers don't yet agree on the best way to prevent artificial intelligence systems from reflecting the biases found in society. But we need to continue to expose instances in which AIs have learned to embody the same prejudices that humans do.

It's not surprising that Google wants to fix this particular bias, but it is noteworthy that the company apologized and pointed toward a goal of building more inclusive artificial intelligence. Now it's up to the company and everyone else working on the tech to develop a viable way of doing so. It's not surprising that Google wants to fix this particular bias, but it is noteworthy that the company apologized and pointed toward a goal of building more inclusive artificial intelligence. Now it's up to the company and everyone else working on the tech to develop a viable way of doing so.

Got a tip? You can contact this reporter securely on Signal at +1 201-316-6981, or by email at louise.matsakis@vice.com

Get six of our favorite Motherboard stories every day by signing up for our newsletter.. Update 10/25/17 3:53 PM: A Google spokesperson : A Google spokesperson responded to Motherboard's request for comment and issued the following statement: "We dedicate a lot of efforts to making sure the NLP API avoids bias, but we don't always get it right. This is an example of one of those times, and we are sorry. We take this seriously and are working on improving our models. We will correct this specific case, and, more broadly, building more inclusive algorithms is crucial to bringing the benefits of machine learning to everyone."

Advertisement

John Giannandrea, Google's head of artificial intelligence, told a John Giannandrea, Google's head of artificial intelligence, told a conference audience earlier this year that his main concern with AI isn't deadly super-intelligent robots, but ones that discriminate. "The real safety question, if you want to call it that, is that if we give these systems biased data, they will be biased," he said.

His fears appear to have already crept into Google's own products. His fears appear to have already crept into Google's own products.

In July 2016, Google announced the public beta launch of a new machine learning application program interface (API), called the Cloud Natural Language API. It allows developers to incorporate Google's deep learning models into their own applications. As the company said in its In July 2016, Google announced the public beta launch of a new machine learning application program interface (API), called the Cloud Natural Language API. It allows developers to incorporate Google's deep learning models into their own applications. As the company said in its announcement of the API, it lets you "easily reveal the structure and meaning of your text in a variety of languages."

In addition to entity recognition (deciphering what's being talked about in a text) and syntax analysis (parsing the structure of that text), the API included a sentiment analyzer to allow programs to determine the degree to which sentences expressed a negative or positive sentiment, on a scale of -1 to 1. The problem is the API labels sentences about religious and ethnic minorities as negative—indicating it's inherently biased. For example, it labels both being a Jew and being a homosexual as negative. In addition to entity recognition (deciphering what's being talked about in a text) and syntax analysis (parsing the structure of that text), the API included a sentiment analyzer to allow programs to determine the degree to which sentences expressed a negative or positive sentiment, on a scale of -1 to 1. The problem is the API labels sentences about religious and ethnic minorities as negative—indicating it's inherently biased. For example, it labels both being a Jew and being a homosexual as negative.

Google's sentiment analyzer was not the first and isn't the only one on the market. Sentiment analysis technology grew out of Stanford's Google's sentiment analyzer was not the first and isn't the only one on the market. Sentiment analysis technology grew out of Stanford's Natural Language Processing Group , which offers free, open source language processing tools for developers and academics. The technology has been incorporated into a host of machine learning suites, including Microsoft's Azure and IBM's Watson. But Google's machine learning APIs, like its consumer-facing products, are arguably the most accessible on offer, due in part to their affordable price.

Advertisement

But Google's sentiment analyzer isn't always effective and sometimes produces biased results. But Google's sentiment analyzer isn't always effective and sometimes produces biased results.

Two weeks ago, I experimented with the API for a project I was working on. I began feeding it sample texts, and the analyzer started spitting out scores that seemed at odds with what I was giving it. I then threw simple sentences about different religions at it. Two weeks ago, I experimented with the API for a project I was working on. I began feeding it sample texts, and the analyzer started spitting out scores that seemed at odds with what I was giving it. I then threw simple sentences about different religions at it.

When I fed it "I'm Christian" it said the statement was positive: When I fed it "I'm Christian" it said the statement was positive:

When I fed it "I'm a Sikh" it said the statement was even more positive: When I fed it "I'm a Sikh" it said the statement was even more positive:

But when I gave it "I'm a Jew" it determined that the sentence was slightly negative: But when I gave it "I'm a Jew" it determined that the sentence was slightly negative:

The problem doesn't seem confined to religions. It similarly thought statements about being homosexual or a gay black woman were also negative: The problem doesn't seem confined to religions. It similarly thought statements about being homosexual or a gay black woman were also negative:

Being a dog? Neutral. Being homosexual? Negative: Being a dog? Neutral. Being homosexual? Negative:

I could go on, but you can give it a try yourself: Google Cloud offers I could go on, but you can give it a try yourself: Google Cloud offers an easy-to-use interface to test the API.

It looks like Google's sentiment analyzer is biased, as many artificially intelligent algorithms have been It looks like Google's sentiment analyzer is biased, as many artificially intelligent algorithms have been found to be . AI systems, including sentiment analyzers, are trained using human texts like news stories and books. Therefore, they often reflect the same biases found in society. We don't know yet the best way to completely remove bias from artificial intelligence, but it's important to continue to expose it.

Last year for example, researchers at Princeton Last year for example, researchers at Princeton published a paper about a state-of-the-art natural language processing technique called GloVe. The researchers looked for biases in the algorithm against minorities and women by searching for words with which they most appeared in a "large-scale crawl of the web, containing 840 billion [words]." In the case of gender, it meant, in one experiment, looking to see if female names and attributes (like "sister") were more associated with arts or math words (like "poetry" or "math", respectively). In the case of race, one experiment looked for associations between black names (like "Jermaine" or "Tamika") with words denoting pleasantness or negativeness (like "friend" or "terrible," respectively).

Advertisement

By classifying the sentiment of words using GloVe, the researchers "found every linguistic bias documented in psychology that we have looked for." Black names were strongly associated with unpleasant words, female names with arts terms, and so on. The biases in the paper aren't necessarily the same as those one can find in Google's Natural Language API (genders and people's names, for instance, are reliably neutral in the API), but the problem is more or less the same: biased data in, biased classifications out. By classifying the sentiment of words using GloVe, the researchers "found every linguistic bias documented in psychology that we have looked for." Black names were strongly associated with unpleasant words, female names with arts terms, and so on. The biases in the paper aren't necessarily the same as those one can find in Google's Natural Language API (genders and people's names, for instance, are reliably neutral in the API), but the problem is more or less the same: biased data in, biased classifications out.

Natural language processing provides a landscape of difficult problems for AI researchers, and sentiment analysis poses its own myriad challenges. A chief obstacle to programming a non-biased language AI is that the data itself is rarely purified of human prejudice. Sentiment analyzers are "all susceptible to the data they're given to a training set," Marilyn Walker, a professor of computer science at UC Santa Cruz told me over the phone. In the case of the Princeton paper (and likely Google's sentiment analyzer as well), the dataset included more or less the entire web, with all its accompanying biases. Natural language processing provides a landscape of difficult problems for AI researchers, and sentiment analysis poses its own myriad challenges. A chief obstacle to programming a non-biased language AI is that the data itself is rarely purified of human prejudice. Sentiment analyzers are "all susceptible to the data they're given to a training set," Marilyn Walker, a professor of computer science at UC Santa Cruz told me over the phone. In the case of the Princeton paper (and likely Google's sentiment analyzer as well), the dataset included more or less the entire web, with all its accompanying biases.

Google declined to clarify how its API was trained, but the process generally works like this: A machine learning algorithm takes a corpus of text data labeled with positive and negative values, like movie or restaurant reviews. It then learns which words are associated with positive or negative scores. Then, it can bootstrap that data to learn about associations of other texts by identifying which words are associated with other positive or negative words. For example, if the word "good" is assigned a positive weight because it's associated with high movie scores, and the word "translucent" is likely found in a sentence with "good," then "translucent" is assigned its own positive sentiment. Google declined to clarify how its API was trained, but the process generally works like this: A machine learning algorithm takes a corpus of text data labeled with positive and negative values, like movie or restaurant reviews. It then learns which words are associated with positive or negative scores. Then, it can bootstrap that data to learn about associations of other texts by identifying which words are associated with other positive or negative words. For example, if the word "good" is assigned a positive weight because it's associated with high movie scores, and the word "translucent" is likely found in a sentence with "good," then "translucent" is assigned its own positive sentiment.

The result for "Jew" provides a glimpse into how this might be happening with the Natural Language API. In 2006, researchers The result for "Jew" provides a glimpse into how this might be happening with the Natural Language API. In 2006, researchers investigated why the top result when searching for "Jew" on Google was the anti-Semitic site "Jew Watch." The reason? Hate sites tended to call Jews "Jew," while news sites and other resources are more likely to use the word "Jewish."

The problem is that artificial intelligence systems like Google's Natural Language API will inevitably absorb the biases that plague the internet and human society more broadly. "It's easy to get around [the bias] for each individual problem," Ernest Davis, a professor of computer science at New York University told me over the phone, "But getting around it systematically is very difficult." The problem is that artificial intelligence systems like Google's Natural Language API will inevitably absorb the biases that plague the internet and human society more broadly. "It's easy to get around [the bias] for each individual problem," Ernest Davis, a professor of computer science at New York University told me over the phone, "But getting around it systematically is very difficult.". . . A lot of major players in the science and technology scene believe we have a lot to fear from AI surpassing human intelligence, even as others laugh off those claims. But one thing both sides agree on is that artificial intelligence is subject to humanity’s flaws. If a neural network is trained on wrong or incomplete data, it will itself be so.

And that’s exactly what seems to have happened in one of Google’s AI products.

Gerd Leonhard/Flickr

In July last year, Google launched a beta version of its new machine learning app called Cloud Natural Language API. it allowed developers to integrate Google’s AI learning system into their own apps. One of the features of the AI is a sentiment analyser, which measure on a scale of -1 to 1 whether the sentences it’s reading express a positive or negative sentiment.

Two weeks ago, Motherboard’s Andrew Thompson tested out the API for a pet project, feeding the program sample text to analyse. He made a troubling discovery that the AI considered sentences referring to religious and ethnic minorities negative, as well as statements involving homosexuality. A saple saying “I’m Christian” registered a positive sentiment, with “I’m a Sikh” being even more so. On the other hand, typing in “I’m a Jew” or “I’m a homosexual” were both considered negative, as well as other permutations involving those identifiers.

REUTERS

It’s not that Google is making a statement about its conservative leanings, the problem here is the data used to train the AI. These kinds of programs designed to learn and mimic natural language are usually fed collections of text like books, news articles and such. If the text contained therein is biased, the AI learns to be that way as well.

In the case of Jewish people, anti-semitic content tends to refer to them as “Jew,” while neutral sources are more likely to use the word “Jewish”. Because of that, the word “Jew” has gained a negative connotation in the AI’s mind, but not the word “Jewish”.

It’s a common theme in artificial intelligence, that the program is only as strong as the data it learns from. If society is flawed, then the AI that learns from it will be as well. Of course, there’s no way just yet to completely cut off machine learning algorithms from this kind of biased data, but it’s a problem there’s hope to eventually work around.

And in the meantime, Google is certainly taking the problem seriously. Not only does it seem to have corrected the sentiment analyser’s bias (which you can try for yourself here), but it also recently set up a research collaborative to consider the ethical and economic impact of the advent of AI on society.. 