Pony.ai, a Chinese autonomous driving startup with an office in the U.S., has paused its driverless pilot fleet in California six months after it was approved by local regulators to test autonomous vehicles without a human safety driver.

On November 19, the California Department of Motor Vehicles notified Pony.ai that it was suspending its driverless testing permit following a reported collision in Fremont on October 28, the DMV told TechCrunch in a statement.

Pony.ai has 10 Hyundai Kona electric cars registered under its driverless testing permit. This suspension does not impact Pony.ai’s permit for testing with a safety driver, said the DMV.

According to Pony.ai’s collision report, the incident took place on a clear morning when its driverless vehicle was changing lanes using the autonomous mode.

“Recently, one of our vehicles experienced an incident in Fremont, California, involving a collision with a lane divider and street sign. No other vehicles were involved and no injuries occurred,” a Pony.ai spokesperson told TechCrunch.

“We immediately launched an investigation, and are in contact with the California DMV about the incident,” the spokesperson said.

While other autonomous vehicles had reported crashes, most have occurred while the safety driver has been operating the vehicle manually or when another vehicle has struck an AV from behind. This incident stands out because the vehicle was in autonomous mode and didn’t involve any other vehicle.

The incident puts a question mark on Pony.ai’s autonomous driving capabilities. The startup’s AVs have “successfully driven over 750,000 real-world miles in California since 2017,” said its spokesperson.

Founded in 2016 by Baidu veterans, Pony.ai is among a group of AV startups that have R&D teams and testing fleets in both China and California. It has attracted heavyweight investors like Toyota and Sequoia Capital, with over $1 billion in total raise and a valuation of $5.3 billion as of February. Just recently, alongside Baidu, it was approved to operate commercial drivered autonomous cars within a demo zone in Beijing.

The company has also faced obstacles in recent months. It had halted plans to list through a SPAC in New York after failing to reassure Beijing it would not be targeted by the U.S. government, Reuters reported in August. Last month, TechCrunch reported that the company’s autonomous trucking business had lost a few key executives, leaving the newly minted unit in limbo. As competition heats up, the startup has a lot to prove to its investors that it has competitive technologies and a viable commercial future.. Autonomous vehicle startup Pony.ai will issue a recall for three vehicles following an October crash in California, according to the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration (NHTSA).

The agency said on Tuesday that this was the first recall of an automated driving system, Reuters first reported.

“Whether the vehicle is operated by a human driver or an automated driving system, the need to protect roadway users remains the same,” NHTSA Deputy Administrator Steven Cliff said in a statement. “As this first recall of an automated driving system underscores, NHTSA will ensure that vehicle manufacturers and developers prioritize safety while they usher in the latest technologies.”

Toyota-backed Pony.ai had been testing its pilot fleet of 10 Hyundai Kona EVs without a human safety operator in California for several months when one of its vehicles collided with a lane divider and a street sign in Fremont. No other vehicles were involved, and no one was injured, but the incident prompted the California Department of Motor Vehicles to suspend Pony’s driverless testing permit, as well as a formal inquiry from NHTSA.

The agency told Pony.ai it believed the software had a safety defect and requested a recall, the startup said in a filing.

The software issue in the vehicle that crashed was also found in two other Pony.ai vehicles, all three of which have been repaired, according to the startup. Pony also said it has updated its software code.

“This was the first and only time such an incident has occurred in a Pony.ai autonomous vehicle,” a Pony.ai spokesperson told TechCrunch, noting that the startup has completed more than 6 million real-world autonomous driving miles and 305,617 miles driven autonomously in California last year.

Pony’s driverless permit will remain suspended until the DMV has verified that the startup has taken appropriate action to correct the deficiency that caused the suspension, an agency spokesperson told TechCrunch. Pony’s drivered testing permit in California remains unaffected.

Earlier this week, Pony.ai said its valuation has surged to $8.5 billion after the close of its Series D funding round. While the startup hasn’t had the best of luck in the United States, due to its U.S. trucking division all but dissolving and several key executives leaving to start rival companies, it is steadily building out its trucking and robotaxi business in China.

Update: This article was updated to include a statement from the California DMV.. Listen to this article

Following an accident on October 28, 2021 while operating a vehicle in autonomous mode, Pony.ai‘s driverless testing permit has been suspended by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). This is the first time the state of California has suspended such a permit.

The accident occurred at 10:50 a.m. on October 28. The autonomous vehicle was being tested on roads in Fremont, Calif., which is where Pony.ai’s U.S. headquarters is located. You can read the full report of the accident on the CA DMV website. Below is a description of the accident:

“On October 28, 2021, after turning right onto Fremont Blvd from Cushing Pkwy, the Pony.ai Autonomous Vehicle (“Pony.ai AV”) performed a left lane change maneuver in autonomous mode. While performing the lane change, the Pony.ai AV came into contact with a center divider on Fremont Blvd. and the traffic sign that was posted on the divider. The Pony.ai AV suffered moderate damage to the front of the vehicle and the undercarriage. There were no injuries and no other vehicles involved. Fremont Police Department were called to report the incident and the damaged street sign. Pony.ai has subsequently worked with local authorities to resolve all issues related to the damaged sign.”

There have been plenty of other reported crashes involving autonomous vehicles. But this incident stands out because the vehicle was operating in autonomous mode and didn’t involve any other vehicle.

The Robot Report reached out to both the CA DMV and Pony.ai on December 13, 2021 for more information about the reinstatement process. Neither organization responded to us, however, Reuters obtained the following statement from the DMV: “On Nov. 19, the DMV notified Pony.ai that the department is suspending its driverless testing permit, effective immediately, following a reported solo collision in Fremont, California, on Oct. 28.”

Six months ago, Pony.ai became the eighth company to receive a driverless testing permit in California. The other companies are Apollo, AutoX, Cruise, Nuro, Waymo, WeRide and Zoox. Cruise, Nuro and Waymo are the only companies with permits allowing them to deploy autonomous vehicles in commercial operations. Cruise and Waymo are developing robotaxis to transport passengers, while Nuro is developing an autonomous delivery vehicle.

Pony.ai has 10 Hyundai Kona electric vehicles registered under its driverless testing permit. According to the CA DMV, the suspension doesn’t impact Pony.ai’s permit for testing with a human safety driver.

Pony.ai IPO falls apart

Pony.ai is a startup that operates in both China and the U.S. Most of its operations, including its autonomous trucks, take place in China. It hoped to go public in the U.S. via a merger with a special purpose acquisition company (SPAC) that would have raised an additional $1.2 billion in funding.

But in August 2021, Pony.ai suspended those plans with VectoIQ Acquisition. According to Reuters, this deal fell through after Pony.ai “failed to gain assurances from Beijing that it would not become a target of a crackdown against Chinese technology companies.”

Pony.ai recently lost at least three key executives following the merger of its autonomous car and truck R&D teams. Zhenhao Pan was the CTO of Pony’s trucking business; Youhan Sun led planning and control for Pony’s trucking business in the U.S.; and Sun Haowen, former head of planning and control for Pony’s autonomous driving in China.

Expanding in China

Pony.ai was granted a license by the city of Shenzhen to start autonomous driving tests on the city’s open roads. The 12-square-mile (20 square kilometer) pilot zone in Beijing covers major subway stations, residential areas, and tech parks. With the addition of Shenzhen, Pony.ai said it now performs autonomous driving tests or autonomous services in seven Chinese cities.

On November 25, 2021, Pony.ai announced it received approval to run paid autonomous robotaxi services in southeastern Beijing. Beijing, China’s capital city, is the first Tier-1 city in China to approve robotaxi commercialization, allowing self-driving companies to charge for their autonomous services.. FSD

According to the Department of Motor Vehicles, the autonomous vehicle suffered moderate damage to the front and undercarriage. There were no injuries and no other vehicles involved, but nevertheless, the DMV has removed Toyota-backed Pony.ai from its list of driverless permit holders No fewer than 10 examples of the Hyundai Kona were previously registered under the driverless permit. At the present moment, Pony.ai is authorized to test autonomous vehicles with a driver behind the steering wheel. Pony.ai wants to roll out a robotaxi service in California next year, which is why the suspended permit is pretty troublesome for the American startup.Founded by James Peng and Tiancheng Lou, the Fremont-based outfit is duking it out with the likes of Google Waymo, the Ford- and Volkswagen-backed Argo AI, and GM’s Cruise over the lucrative robotaxi business. Care to guess what all of these companies have in common? In addition to driverless technology, they also share missed targets and downsized plans.Pony.ai has covered more than 750,000 miles (1,207,008 kilometers) in California since 2017, but nevertheless, fully driverless technology still has a long way to go. Elon Musk famously said that Teslawill have Level 5 autonomy by the end of 2021, yet the Texas-based automaker limits the Full Self-Driving suite to Level 2. Why is that, you’re asking? Because it’s the driver’s responsibility to stay alert in Level 2-equipped vehicles. In other words, the company would get off scot-free in the event of a crash.According to the Society of Automotive Engineers, there are six levels of automation to speak of. Level 0 is fully manual like your grandpa’s truck, while Level 5 automation does not require human supervision at all. As a matter of fact, Level 5 cars are not required steering wheels or pedals.