A new video has surfaced on Reddit that shows a Tesla vehicle crashing into a $3.5 million Cirrus Vision jet after being ‘summoned’ in a precarious way by the owner at a Cirrus event at Spokane’s Felts Field airport. Tesla Model Y has a feature called “Smart Summon” that allows the driver to push a button on their phone to call the car to come to them autonomously.

A sight to behold

In this video, we can see the summoned car going all the way up to a Cirrus Vision jet and colliding with its tail. It then still keeps pushing forward until it has turned the jet around in a complete half-circle before it finally comes to a halt. It’s quite a sight to behold.. A video was posted on Reddit Thursday that appears to show a Tesla vehicle slowly crashing into a $3.5 million private jet after being “summoned” by its owner using the automaker’s automatic parking feature.

The Reddit user (who did not immediately respond to a request for comment) said the incident took place at an event sponsored by aircraft manufacturer Cirrus at Felts Field in Spokane, Washington.

Tesla meets $3.5 million private jet

The smartphone video appears to capture security camera footage of the Tesla slowly crashing into and then actually pushing the Cirrus Vision Jet across the tarmac. A spokesperson for Felts Field also did not respond to a request for comment.

According to the poster, the Tesla owner was using the “Smart Summon” feature that enables a Tesla vehicle to leave a parking space and navigate around obstacles to its owner. Using just the Tesla app on your smartphone, you can “summon” your car to you from a maximum distance of 200 feet, as long as the car is within your line of sight.

The Reddit user said they also own a Tesla Model Y but were not the “poor soul (with poor decision making abilities) who summoned his Tesla around several expensive aircraft - only to crash it into the most expensive one ($3,500,000)!”

A video of a near-collision with a speeding SUV left the owner feeling their test of Smart Summon “didn’t go so well.” Another Tesla was filmed by pedestrians and people in other cars seeming confused as it tried to make its way across a Walmart parking lot.. According to Tesla, Smart Summon "allow[s] you to move Model Y to your location (using your phone's GPS as a target destination) and will weave around or stop for objects as necessary"

Tesla on autopilot slams into £2.7million private jet before pushing it across Tarmac

A Tesla car on autopilot crashed into a £2.5million private jet after its owner reportedly tried to call for it using the vehicle's Smart Summon feature.

The collision happened at an event hosted by aircraft manufacturer Cirrus in Spokane, Washington, in the US.

Video shows the car slowly ramming into the aircraft and pushing it across the Tarmac.

The car is believed to have been in Smart Summon mode which caused it to slam into the multimillion-dollar jet.

The Tesla website said Smart Summon is "designed to allow you to move Model Y to your location (using your phone's GPS as a target destination) or to a location of your choice, manoeuvring around and stopping for objects as necessary".

Image: reddit) reddit)

It adds: "Smart Summon manoeuvres Model Y out of parking spaces and around corners. This is useful for moving Model Y out of a tight parking spot, through puddles, or helping you retrieve your car while carrying packages."

However, the company added there were multiple caveats to the feature.

It said on its website: "Smart Summon is a BETA feature. You must continually monitor the vehicle and its surroundings and stay prepared to take immediate action at any time.

"It is the driver's responsibility to use Smart Summon safely, responsibly, and as intended.

"Smart Summon may not stop for all objects (especially very low objects such as some curbs, or very high objects such as a shelf) and may not react to all traffic.

"Smart Summon does not recognise the direction of traffic, does not navigate around empty parking spaces, and may not anticipate crossing traffic."

Image: reddit) reddit) Image: reddit) reddit)

Smart Summon was first implemented by Tesla in 2019.

The feature, however, was met with disapproval after Tesla owners complained of property damage and multiple near-accidents from the driverless cars.

In February, the EV-vehicle firm recalled almost 54,000 of its self-driving vehicles due to a glitch which allows them to travel through stop signs.

The US company will recall 53,822 U.S. vehicles with the company's Full Self-Driving (Beta) software.

Image: HANDOUT MOTOR PR) HANDOUT MOTOR PR)

There were concerns some models could out "rolling stops" rather than coming to a complete halt at some intersections posing a safety risk.

The US's National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said the recall covers some 2016-2022 Model S and Model X, 2017-2022 Model 3, and 2020-2022 Model Y vehicles.

NHTSA said the feature may allow vehicles to travel through an all-way stop intersection - a US four-way stop is a traffic management system which requires vehicles on all the approaches to a road intersection to stop - without first coming to a halt.

Tesla will perform an over-the-air software update that disables the "rolling stop" functionality, the NHTSA said.. . It is unclear how much damage the car or plane sustained in the incident.

A viral video of a driverless Teslacar slowly crashing into a private jet worth around $3 million has taken the internet by storm. Shared on Reddit, the clip shows the Tesla Model Y steadily approaching the 9.4 metre-long Cirrus Vision jet after the owner of the electric car summoned it using an automated parking feature.

According to New Zealand-based media outlet Stuff, the Reddit user claimed that the incident took place at an event hosted by aircraft manufacturer Cirrus at Felts Field in Spokane, Washington. The user also said that the car owner was using the “Smart Sumon” feature, which enables the vehicle to leave the parking space and navigate around obstacles to its owner.

Watch the video below:

It is still not clear how much damage the car or plane sustained in the incident. Euronews Next reported that another Reddit user, who claimed to have witnessed the incident first-hand, stated that the electric car owner was inside a nearby hangar at the time, apparently going against the company's advice on using the summoning feature safely.

Viral Video | 8-Year-Old Drives Toyota Fortuner In Pakistan

It is to mention that according to Tesla, the Smart Summon feature is “designed to allow you to move Model Y to your location (using your phone's GPS as a target destination) or to a location of your choice, manoeuvring around and stopping for objects as necessary… You must maintain a clear line of sight between you and Model Y and closely monitor the vehicle and its surroundings at all times.”

Meanwhile, this is not the first time the autopilot feature of Tesla has resulted in a collision. In 2019, shortly after Smart Summon was first rolled out, an influential US magazine Consumer Reports said that Tesla Inc's Smart Summon automated parking system is "glitchy" and only works intermittently. Several users had even posted videos on social media of Tesla vehicles that appeared to have been in near-accidents.

Click for more trending news. A video posted to Reddit this week appears to show a Tesla vehicle driving into a jet while using one of its self-driving functions.

Uploaded on Thursday by u/smiteme, the footage, reportedly taken at an event held by the aircraft manufacturer Cirrus, shows the vehicle running into what’s known as a Vision Jet.

The vehicle is said to have struck the aircraft, reportedly valued at around $3.5 million, after the owner activated Tesla’s Smart Summon feature. The Vision Jet can be seen rotating as the Tesla attempts to drive through it.

The Reddit user who allegedly filmed the incident expressed shock at “the poor soul” responsible for the accident.

“I was at an event for the aircraft manufacturer Cirrus,” the redditor wrote. “I also drive a Tesla Model Y – but was not the poor soul (with poor decision making abilities) who summoned his Tesla around several expensive aircraft – only to crash it into the most expensive one ($3,500,000)! Woof.”

The Daily Dot reached out to the redditor who shared the footage but did not hear back by press time.

The incident would not be the first involving Tesla’s Smart Summon function, which allows the vehicle to use its self-driving technology to leave a parking spot and drive around obstacles until it reaches its owner.

As noted by the Verge, numerous Tesla owners reported both close-calls and fender-benders after the feature was introduced in 2019.

Tesla did not respond to the Daily Dot’s inquiry regarding the most recent incident involving the Vision Jet.

The video also made its way over to Twitter where both supporters and critics of Tesla weighed in.

lol someone tried to summon their Tesla via autopilot at an aviation trade show and it crashed into a 3 million dollar jet pic.twitter.com/ae1Th49YsG — phylan.bsky.social (@Phylan) April 22, 2022

The Daily Dot also reached out to Cirrus to ask for details on the incident. While the company did not elaborate on the accident, in a statement, Cirrus confirmed that the aircraft struck by the Tesla was in fact the company’s Vision Jet.

This post has been updated with comment from Cirrus.. A Tesla vehicle was caught on video crashing into a $3.5M Cirrus Vision jet after being ‘summoned’ in a dangerous way by the owner.

Smart Summon builds on Tesla’s previous “Summon” feature, which was used by owners to move their cars autonomously for a few feet in their driveway or in tight parking situations. With the new version, owners are able to Summon their Tesla vehicles from further away, and the cars will navigate more complex parking environments.

CEO Elon Musk described Smart Summon as “Tesla’s most viral feature.”

A few weeks after the release, it had already been used over 550,000 times and several Tesla owners posted videos of their vehicles being involved in crashes and near misses while testing the new Smart Summon feature.

It is primarily used to have your car drive back “autonomously” to you from where you parked it in a parking lot. In some ways, it was the first truly “self-driving” feature for Tesla, since it could be used without anyone in the car.

But like any of Tesla’s Autopilot features or Full Self-Driving Beta, owners need to stay attentive at all times, and be ready to take control; we got an extreme example of why this is the case as Tesla vehicle crashed into a jet of all things.

At a Cirrus event at Spokane’s Felts Field airport, what appears to be a Tesla Model Y being summoned crashed in a Vision Jet. A Redditor shared a video of the incident from a security camera:

The video evidence would point to the owner not paying attention when summoning the vehicle since it looks like there was plenty of time to see that the vehicle was heading straight for the jet.

In order for Smart Summon to work, the owner has to keep their finger on a button in the app. As soon as they lift their finger, the car comes to a stop. In this case, it is particularly concerning that the Tesla vehicle kept moving forward after making contact with the plane.

In the past, Tesla vehicles on Autopilot have had difficulties detecting objects that are lifted off the ground, like a semi trailer, which can be similar to the back of an airplane.. Self-driving Tesla crashes into $3.5 million private jet using 'smart summon' feature

The car was in "Smart Summon" mode when it ran into the jet. The feature was introduced by Tesla in 2019 and is still a beta feature.