ARTICLE TITLE: TikTok's "For You" Algorithm Directed New Users towards Disinformation about the War in Ukraine
Doom scrolling down the war disinformation rabbit-hole

In March 2022, a team of six NewsGuard analysts created new accounts on TikTok and ran two experiments designed to mimic normal usage of the app. In the first experiment, analysts were instructed to scroll through TikTok’s personalized “For You” feed for 45 minutes, watching any videos relating to the Russia-Ukraine conflict in full, but not following any accounts or running any searches.

Within 40 minutes of joining TikTok, all of NewsGuard’s analysts were shown false or misleading content about the war in Ukraine.

Among these claims were both pro-Russian and pro-Ukraine falsehoods:

Falsehoods peddled by the Kremlin:



The false claim that footage from the war in Ukraine is fake

The false claim that Ukraine is led by a neo-Nazi junta

The false claim that the U.S. has bioweapon laboratories in Ukraine

The false claim that Vladimir Putin and Russia are not the aggressors in this conflict, and that the U.S. orchestrated the 2014 revolution in Ukraine

Other falsehoods:



The false claim that U.S. forces are “on the way” to Ukraine

The false claim that Putin was “photoshopped” onto footage of a press conference he gave on March 5, 2022, to hide the fact that he was not in Moscow.

Footage of Ukraine President Zelensky “out there fighting for his country,” which was actually filmed in 2021

Footage of the “Ghost of Kyiv” shooting down six Russian jets, which was actually from the Digital Combat Simulator video game

Footage of a firefight “by Ukrainian army against Russia,” which actually dates to 2015 and shows Ukrainian government troops fighting pro-Russia rebels in the east of the country.

Some of the myths in the videos TikTok’s algorithm fed to analysts have previously been identified as Kremlin propaganda in NewsGuard’s Russia-Ukraine Disinformation Tracking Center.

For example, within 29 minutes of joining TikTok, a French-speaking analyst was shown a video of a speech by Vladimir Putin claiming that “today’s neo-Nazis have taken power in Ukraine” and that responsibility for any bloodshed in the country lies with those in power in Ukraine. As of March 14, 2022, this video had been viewed 1.7 million times and shared more than 15,000 times.

Within 36 minutes, the same analyst was shown a video, published on March 5, of a man claiming that “all the images of this pseudo-war are fake. There are no images coming out of Ukraine, even Russian Spetsnaz soldiers aren’t allowed to have smartphones to film anything – so all the images you seen in the media, are fake.”

As of March 14, 2022, nine days after it was published, the video had been viewed 153,000 times.

Other videos painted a misleading picture of Ukrainian military dominance, including video-game footage purporting to show real-world images of a Ukrainian fighter jet, known as “the Ghost of Kyiv”, shooting down six Russian aircraft.

Toward the end of the 45–minute experiment, analysts’ feeds were almost exclusively populated with both accurate and false content related to the war in Ukraine — with no distinction made between disinformation and reliable sources.

At a time when false narratives about the Russia-Ukraine conflict are proliferating online, none of the videos fed to our analysts by TikTok’s algorithm contained any information about the trustworthiness of the source, warnings, fact-checks, or additional information that could empower users with reliable information.. A new TikTok account can be shown falsehoods about the Ukraine war within minutes of signing up to the app, according to an investigation by anti-misinformation outlet NewsGuard.

The company, which monitors the trustworthiness of news outlets across the web, ran a pair of tests to assess how the video-sharing app treated information about the conflict. It found that a new account that did nothing but scroll the app’s algorithmically curated For You Page watching videos about the war would be funnelled towards false or misleading content within 40 minutes.

“Toward the end of the 45–minute experiment, analysts’ feeds were almost exclusively populated with both accurate and false content related to the war in Ukraine – with no distinction made between disinformation and reliable sources,” the research team wrote.

“At a time when false narratives about the Russia-Ukraine conflict are proliferating online, none of the videos fed to our analysts by TikTok’s algorithm contained any information about the trustworthiness of the source, warnings, fact-checks, or additional information that could empower users with reliable information.”

Among the false claims shown to the researchers was the myth that the US has bioweapon laboratories in Ukraine, and the accusation that Putin was “photoshopped” on to footage of a press conference he gave in early March. Videos also claimed that fake footage was real, and that real footage was fake: videos purportedly of the “Ghost of Kyiv” shooting down Russian jets were taken from a video game, while real videos from the war were decried as fake by pro-Russian accounts.

“Some of the myths in the videos TikTok’s algorithm fed to analysts have previously been identified as Kremlin propaganda,” the researchers said, by the organisation’s Russia-Ukraine Disinformation Tracking Center.

To carry out the test, NewsGuard’s research team simply made new accounts on the app and spent 45 minutes scrolling through the For You Page, stopping to view in full any video that looked like it was about the war in Ukraine.

Although TikTok does not provide a detailed breakdown of how its algorithm weighs signals, the company says it takes into account time spent watching various videos, as well as other signals including likes, comments and who a user follows or has blocked. By watching every video on the war that appeared on their page, the researchers will have “trained” the algorithm to show the new accounts content about the conflict, but not provided any specific signals in favour of misleading material.

TikTok’s search function similarly blended real and false content, delivering videos that contained false or misleading claims in the top 20 results for searches of “Ukraine”, “Russia”, “War”, “Kyiv”, and “Donbas”, NewsGuard said.

A TikTok spokesperson warned that the experiment can only offer limited conclusions about the way the app works in the real world, since it fails to mimic standard view behaviour.

“We continue to respond to the war in Ukraine with increased safety and security resources as we work to remove harmful misinformation and help protect a safe experience on TikTok,” they added. “We also partner with independent fact-checking organisations to support our efforts to help TikTok remain a safe and authentic place.”

The video-sharing app has had a big increase in content related to the war, with videos tagged #Ukraine receiving more than 30bn views by the end of last week. One report from the New York Times found that, proportionally, Ukraine content on TikTok outpaces that on platforms more than twice its size.