As Russia expands its assault on Ukraine, the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab) is keeping a close eye on Russia’s movements across the military, cyber, and information domains. With more than five years of experience monitoring the situation in Ukraine, as well as Russia’s use of propaganda and disinformation to undermine the US, NATO, and the European Union, DFRLab’s global team presents the latest installment of the Russian War Report.

Tracking narratives

Hacked news program and deepfake video spread false Zelenskyy claims

Municipal VK accounts use children and patriotism to justify Ukraine invasion

Russia claims to have “obtained documents” proving Ukraine was preparing invasion of its eastern regions

Media policy

Russia threatens to block YouTube

Documenting dissent

Information fog surrounds Russian TV journalist who conducted on-air protest

Suspicious Facebook page creates ads calling for people to join Ukraine’s International Legion

Security

New Belarusian constitution revoking non-nuclear status goes into effect

International relations

Economic sanctions continue to mount on Belarus

Hacked news program and deepfake video spread false Zelenskyy claims

A national news broadcast on the television channel Ukraine 24 was breached by hackers on March 16. The program’s news ticker was hacked to display messages to appear as though they were coming from Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. The messages urged Ukrainians to stop fighting and give up their weapons, while claiming that Zelenskyy “wanted to take Donbas” but was unsuccessful, so he had fled Kyiv.

The TV network confirmed that the news ticker was hacked and the messages were false. In response, Zelenskyy also filmed a short video debunking the messages and calling them a childish provocation.

On the same day, the pro-Kremlin Telegram channel “Operational” reported that hackers published to Ukrainian websites a deepfake video of Zelenskyy repeating similar messages. The Telegram channel shared a video file, which according to its metadata was created on March 16, two hours before being uploaded to Telegram. Notably, the messages shared in the ticker and the deepfake video, encouraging Ukrainians to surrender, were amplified on VKontakte (VK), the Kremlin-owned social media platform that is similar to Facebook. Some commenters in Russia hypothesized that Zelenskyy uploaded the video in desperation and then backtracked after reconsidering.

The deepfake video was debunked very quickly by Zelenskyy and was ridiculed by Ukrainians who noted the poor quality of the video and audio.

—Roman Osadchuk, Research Associate

Municipal VK accounts use children and patriotism to justify Ukraine invasion

Several accounts on the Kremlin-controlled social media platform VKontakte are posting “copy pasta” (slang for copying-and-pasting identical text) to justify Russia’s decision to invade Ukraine. While some of the accounts are personal, others belong to municipal organizations. The text repeats Kremlin narratives suggesting that the war “was needed to stop the shelling of Donbas” and that “Ukraine should be purged from nationalists.” It also stated, “It is absolutely clear that all these sanctions would have been imposed anyway.” The copypasta trend was first spotted by Russian journalist Dmitry Kolezev.

The identical posts used the hashtags #своихнебросаем (“do not leave ours behind”), #Zанаших (“For ours”), #Zапрезидент (“For the president”), and #Мывместе (“We are together”). Other posts using these hashtags feature kids being physically arranged to form the letters “Z” or “V,” the symbols of the Russian invasion, or children holding a piece of paper with the hashtags written on them.

Another notable campaign featured a video that depicts young people supporting the invasion. The video includes text that says, “Stalingrad is ours!” This video intends to highlight the famous World War II battle in an effort to draw patriotic support for the war in Ukraine. The original video was published on the “Young guard” page. Fifty minutes after the initial post, five municipal entities from the Frolovsky district reshared the video, all within three minutes of each other. One hour later, eighteen posts were shared, all within two minutes of each other, by municipal bodies such as schools or cultural institutions, in the Elantskiy district of Volgograd. This suggests there was a centralized decision by regional government entities to share the same posts on VK locally .

The use of children to promote pro-war hashtags and the focus on municipal entities resharing the same content suggests a push for “patriotic” civic content. While most of the posts did not reach a broad audience, it is significant that multiple accounts participated, amplifying the reach of the posts.

—Roman Osadchuk, Research Associate

Russia claims to have “obtained documents” proving Ukraine was preparing invasion of its eastern regions

In an attempt to further justify Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the Kremlin continues to present “proof” – in the forms suspicious documents and verbal statements – of Kyiv’s intentions to attack its eastern regions. Alongside unfounded claims that Ukraine planned to use “dirty nuclear bombs” and bioweapons against the Donbas region and Russia, the Kremlin stated that they obtained documentary evidence showing Kyiv’s plan to “invade the territories of Donetsk People’s Republic, Luhansk People’s Republic, and Crimea.” According to Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation Nikolay Patrushev, “the documentary evidence” was obtained during “Russia’s special military operation in Ukraine.”

Kremlin media previously promoted claims that Kyiv was planning to attack Donbas prior to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine to create a pretext and prepare justification for Moscow’s attack.

—Eto Buziashvili, Research Associate, Tbilisi, Georgia

Russia threatens to block YouTube

On March 14, the Russian state censor threatened to block Google’s YouTube video platform in the country. This marks the first time that the Russian government has made such an explicit threat. Following Russia’s ban of Instagram, YouTube remains the largest Western social media platform still available to Russian citizens. In 2021, YouTube reported 58 million Russian users, making it the video service’s fifth-largest national market.

The impetus for the Russian government threat was YouTube’s March 11 decision to remove all Russian state-funded media channels globally. Specifically, Russia has demanded the reinstatement of channels funded by its “Soviet Television: State Television and Radio Fund.” This fund focuses on the historical preservation of Soviet-era films, television, and newsreels and appears unrelated to current Russian war propaganda efforts. By basing its objection on a relatively noncontroversial state media channel – as opposed to RT, for example – Russia seeks to cast its confrontation with YouTube in the best possible light.

Russia’s independent YouTube community is already reeling from YouTube’s March 10 decision to suspend all monetization within Russia. For now, the most popular Russian YouTube creators are still able to make some advertising revenue from foreign subscribers. Less popular Russian YouTube channels, however, have lost their income entirely. Speaking to Novaya Gazeta, Russian YouTube stars were pessimistic about their ability to rebuild their followings on VKontakte, noting that VK has already begun to ban independent media producers.

Both Russian YouTube creators and those close to the Russian government express the sense that a YouTube ban is ultimately inevitable. As one Russian reporter close to the Kremlin recently warned Telegram followers, “The time has come for us to live without YouTube.”

—Emerson T. Brooking, Resident Senior Fellow, Washington DC

Information fog surrounds Russian TV journalist who conducted on-air protest

On March 14, Marina Ovsyannikova, an editor at Kremlin-controlled Channel One TV, interrupted a live broadcast of the primetime news program “Vremya.” Ovsyannikova stood in the background holding a poster that read: “No war, stop the war, don’t believe the propaganda, they are lying to you here.” In a pre-recorded video statement, she explained that she is against Russian President Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine and expressed shame that she worked for Kremlin media. Channel One reportedly acknowledged the incident to Kremlin-owned TASS news agency.



Ovsyannikova was not heard from again until the evening of March 15, when she briefly talked with journalists after exiting the Ostankino district court building with her lawyer Anton Gashinsky. The court issued a fine of 30,000 rubles ($280).

After the incident, Ovsyannikova’s name trended on Twitter in Russia and abroad, with some users suggesting she had gone missing. Ovsyannikova has an Instagram and Facebook account, but both provide limited public information. After the incident on “Vremya,” accounts impersonating Ovsyannikova appeared on Instagram and Twitter, neither of which are still accessible in Russia.

Screenshots of search results for Marina Ovsyannikova on Instagram and Twitter. (Source: Instagram, left; Twitter, right)

Some of the fake accounts attempted to spread false information about Ovsyannikova. One account alleged that she previously supported Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, while another spread false information about the sentence she is facing. Both accounts have been removed.

Some Twitter users suggested that her appearance in the live broadcast was staged, as “everything is pre-planned in Putin’s Russia,” to “lift sanctions,” or to “whitewash ordinary Russians of their sins.” The Guardian and Meduza, meanwhile, published articles explaining how it would be possible for Ovsyannikova to interrupt a live broadcast.

Putin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov described the incident as an “act of hooliganism.” Oleg Matveychev, the Deputy Chairman of the State Duma Committee on Information Policy, Information Technology, and Communications, said it was a “provocation” and accused the US of paying Ovsyannikova “some $300 a month for this or $1,000 extra.” Kuban Oblast Governor Anna Minkova, who claimed to be the former boss of Ovsyannikova while she worked for Kuban television, characterized her as lazy and opportunistic. The inconsistency of these messages suggests that Ovsyannikova’s appearance took the Kremlin by surprise.

—Nika Aleksejeva, Lead Researcher, Riga, Latvia

Suspicious Facebook page creates ads calling for people to join Ukraine’s International Legion

On March 15, POLITICO correspondent Mark Scott tweeted about a Facebook page called “Ukrainian Legion” publishing advertisements calling on foreigners to join the International Legion of Defense of Ukraine. One day later, he tweeted that Meta is removing the Ukrainian Legion page for violating the company’s terms of service, specifically its policy against impersonation. The Facebook page was created on March 9 under the category “charity organization.”

The DFRLab searched for the page’s ads in the Facebook Ad Library and although the page was already removed, roughly forty ads are still visible in the library. The ads were targeted to Facebook and Instagram users in different countries, including Poland, Sweden, Latvia, Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, United States, and Canada. The ads instructed users on how to apply to the International Legion of Defense of Ukraine, some of the ads contained the contact information for Ukrainian embassies in the countries targeted by the page admins.

A screencap shows a collection of ads launched by Ukrainian Legion Facebook page (Source: DFRLab via Meta Ad Library)

The first ad in the set available for viewing was launched on March 11 and was paid for in Ukrainian currency. For most of the ads, less than USD $100 was spent on promotion. The ads included barcodes and links leading to the website fightforua.org, which was developed by Ukraine’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs in March. However, the Ukrainian Legion Facebook page is not listed on the fightforua.org website as a social media account run by the website.

Facebook’s policy against impersonation includes the false representation of a brand, entity, or public figure. This implies that the Ukrainian Legion Facebook page was not connected to the official government effort to recruit foreign fighters.

—Givi Gigitashvili, Research Associate, Warsaw, Poland

New Belarusian constitution revoking non-nuclear status goes into effect

On March 15, Belarus’s new constitution went into effect, officially depriving the country of its previously neutral stance and revoking its non-nuclear status. The referendum on the constitutional amendments was held on February 27 and was allegedly supported by 82.86 percent of the population. As a result, the new constitution revokes Belarus’s non-nuclear status, allowing Russia to share and store nuclear technology in Belarus. According to a report from EUvsDisinfo, the result of the vote was falsified and the turnout was exaggerated. The report says that low turnout and minimal media coverage demonstrate “Lukashenka’s submission to the Kremlin.”

Some small anti-constitution protests were recorded in Belarus on March 15, but they were quickly dispersed.

—Lukas Andriukaitis, Associate Director, Brussels, Belgium

Economic sanctions continue to mount on Belarus

Western countries continue to mount economic sanctions against Belarus as a punishment for cooperating with Russia in the war against Ukraine.

On March 16, Switzerland’s Federal Council announced its decision to implement sanctions on Belarus. Switzerland said it would adopt the same sanction regime as the European Union. The US, UK, and the EU all imposed new economic sanctions on Russia and Belarus over the past two days. The UK has added 300 more sanctions on Russia and Belarus, bringing the number of sanctions to more than 1,000. Meanwhile, the EU has already imposed its fourth set of sanctions against Russia.

Meanwhile, on March 12, videos emerged of Polish activists blocking cargo trucks from entering Belarus. The activists refuse to let the trucks pass, claiming that the trucks are subject to the sanctions imposed on Russia. Activists say the trucks are transporting materials for Russia to continue its assault on Ukraine. The blockade was still in place at the time of writing.

—Lukas Andriukaitis, Associate Director, Brussels, Belgium

Related Experts: Givi Gigitashvili, Nika Aleksejeva, Eto Buziashvili, Lukas Andriukaitis, Emerson T. Brooking, and Roman Osadchuk

Image: A deepfake of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy that aired on a hacked Ukrainian 24 newscast.. CNN Business —

Facebook and YouTube said Wednesday that they removed uploads of a deepfake video of Ukranian President Volodymyr Zelensky that purported to show him yielding to Russia.

The deepfake spread widely online Wednesday, as noticed earlier by Vice’s Motherboard. In the video, which CNN Business has reviewed, Zelensky appears to stand behind a presidential podium and in front of a backdrop, both of which feature the Ukranian coat of arms. Wearing a green shirt, Zelensky speaks in Ukranian, appearing to tell Ukranians to put down their weapons in the weeks-old war against Russia.

Deepfakes — which combine the terms “deep learning” and “fake” — are persuasive-looking but false video and audio files. Made using cutting-edge and relatively accessible AI technology, they aim to show a real person doing or saying something they did not. Experts have long been concerned that, as they improve, they would be used to spread misinformation.

In a series of posts on Twitter Wednesday afternoon, Meta’s head of security policy, Nathaniel Gleicher, wrote that the company spotted and removed the video earlier that day. “We’ve quickly reviewed and removed this video for violating our policy against misleading manipulated media, and notified our peers at other platforms,” he wrote.

YouTube spokesperson Ivy Choi said the video and reuploads of it have been removed from the platform because it violates the company’s misinformation policies. “We do allow this video if it provides sufficient education, documentary, scientific or artistic context,” Choi said in a statement.

A Twitter spokesperson said the company is tracking how the video is shared across the social network, and has taken “enforcement action” in cases where it violates company rules (such as its synthetic and manipulated media policy, which forbids users from sharing altered content that may confuse people or lead to harm; in some cases, Twitter may label tweets containing misleading media to give users more context).

While the video doesn’t look tremendously doctored, there are some telltale signs that the video is not what it appears to be. And Zelensky himself appeared in a video posted to an official Ukraine defense account on Twitter, saying he is continuing to defend Ukraine and refusing to lay down weapons against Russia.

Hany Farid, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, and digital forensics expert, pointed out several of the obvious signs that the video is a deepfake. First, it’s a low-quality, low-resolution recording; this is a common trick to hide the distortions created when making a deepfake, as our brains tend to be more forgiving of glitches in low-quality videos. Second, the Zelensky in the video looks straight ahead without moving his arms throughout the clip — it’s very tricky to make a convincing deepfake that includes head motions and hands moving in front of the face. Third, there are little visual inconsistencies in the video, he pointed out, that occur during the process of making a deepfake, which is created a single frame at a time. Though Zelensky’s voice is harder for Farid to comment on, in part because he doesn’t speak Ukranian, he said it sounds a bit off to him.

The video comes weeks after the official Facebook account for Ukraine Land Forces posted a warning that such videos of Zelensky may appear. “Be aware - this is a fake!” the account wrote, soon adding, “Rest assured - Ukraine will not capitulate!” That warning was accompanied by an image that appeared to show Zelensky in a similar shirt as what appeared in the deepfake video, in front of the same backdrop and behind the same podium.

As of Wednesday afternoon, the video could still be found online, such as in some posts CNN Business spotted on Twitter and YouTube in which users made clear that it was a deepfake.

While Farid doesn’t think the video fooled people, he thinks it “muddies the information waters,” making it harder for anyone to trust what they see.

“Casting doubt on what you see and hear and read is a very powerful weapon in the information war and deepfakes are now playing a role in that,” Farid said.. A poorly done deepfake video of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy asking civilians to lay down their arms to the Russian military was circulated on social media in March 2022. In addition to getting some views on social media, a summary of this video was also broadcast on a Ukrainian news station after it was reportedly hacked. The running text at the bottom of this broadcast mentions the message from Zelenskyy's deepfake video.

Ukraine 24 posted a message on Facebook stating that this message was added to the broadcast after the network had been hacked:

The message reads in English (translated via Google):

The running line of the "Ukraine 24" TV channel and the "Today" website were hacked by enemy hackers and broadcast Zelensky's message about alleged "capitulation." ❗️❗️❗️ THIS IS FAKE! FAKE ! Friends, we have repeatedly warned about this. No one is going to give up. Especially, in the circumstances when the Russian army suffers losses in battles with the Ukrainian army!

· ·

Zelenskyy, too, appeared to address this rumor in a video posted to his Facebook page. That video included the caption "Ми вдома і захищаємо Україну" or "We are at home and defending Ukraine" and, according to Ukraine 24, a message to Russian soldiers to lay down their arms.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Ty_OGY_91U



How To Spot a Deepfake Video

This likely isn't the last deepfake video we will encounter during Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Propagandists have been working overtime to change the narrative of the war, and deepfakes, a term used to describe digitally edited videos to make it seem as if a real person is saying or doing something they never said or did, are just another tool in their disinformation toolbox.

In the example above, most viewers can likely tell that the Zelenskyy footage is fake simply by looking at it. His head, for example, doesn't seem to quite fit on his neck. The best strategy to identify deepfakes, however, is to look for their source. Zelenskyy has recorded several videos using the same background on his social media profiles and on the official social media pages of the Ukrainian government. This deepfake, needless to say, was never posted to these pages.

If you see a video that you think might be fake, try taking a screenshot from the video and then running a reverse-image search on Google Images, TinEye, or another reverse-image search engine. You can also send the video to Snopes and we'll do our best to authenticate it.

. Ukraine 24 posted a warning on Facebook that its broadcast and website were hacked. Adding to the chaos is a deepfake video of President Zelenskyy appearing to tell Ukrainians to surrender began to go viral online at the same time. Zelenskyy himself has since posted a video to say Ukraine will not surrender to Russia.

A Ukrainian television news outlet claims that its live broadcast and website were hacked on Wednesday, with a chyron falsely saying Ukraine surrendered, Ukraine 24 said in a Facebook post.

“The running line of the ‘Ukraine 24’ TV channel and the ‘Today’ website were hacked by enemy hackers and broadcast Zelenskyy's message about alleged ‘capitulation’❗️❗️❗️ THIS IS FAKE! FAKE !” the Ukraine 24 post said. “The running line of the ‘Ukraine 24’ TV channel and the ‘Today’ website were hacked by enemy hackers and broadcast Zelenskyy's message about alleged ‘capitulation’❗️❗️❗️ THIS IS FAKE! FAKE !” the Ukraine 24 post said.

In a fake video that started spreading on social media on Wednesday, following the Ukraine 24 hack, Zelenskyy appeared to stand at a podium and address the Ukrainian “defenders,” telling them to lay down their arms and return to their families. According to In a fake video that started spreading on social media on Wednesday, following the Ukraine 24 hack, Zelenskyy appeared to stand at a podium and address the Ukrainian “defenders,” telling them to lay down their arms and return to their families. According to an archived version of the Ukraine 24 website from Wednesday, as well as screenshots shared by journalists on Twitter, a transcription from the deepfaked video is visible:

Dear Ukrainians! Dear defenders! Being president was not so easy. I have to make difficult decisions. At first I decided to return Donbas. It's time to look in the eye. It didn't work out. It only got worse. Much worse. There is no more tomorrow. At least in me. And now I decide to say goodbye to you. I advise you to lay down your arms and return to your families. You should not die in this war. I advise you to live, and I'm going to do the same.

The Ukraine 24 website is still down, and no one has claimed responsibility for the alleged hack or the fake video. The Ukraine 24 website is still down, and no one has claimed responsibility for the alleged hack or the fake video.. A deepfake video of Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenksy calling on his country's troops to surrender to Russian forces reportedly made it onto a hacked Ukrainian news site today after going viral on Facebook, The Daily Dot reports.

According to the report, it may be the first deepfake created to deceive opponents during Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

While the video isn't the cleanest or convincing example of deepfake technologies — it's clearly not the real Zelenksy in the video as, for one, the head is far too big for the body — it's an ominous example of a troubling new weapon in the arsenal of a world power: faked videos of statements made by enemy political leaders.

The real Zelenksy was quick to respond to the deepfake in a separate video posted to Facebook, calling for Russians to surrender instead.

"If I can offer someone to lay down their arms, it’s the Russian military," he said in the video. "Go home. Because we’re home. We are defending our land, our children, and our families."

According to disinformation watchdog the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab), the video was aired on a hacked news program.

"This is a fake!" Ukrainian outlet wrote in an Instagram post, as translated by Google. "Friends, we have repeatedly warned about this. Nobody is going to give up."

Facebook's parent company Meta has since taken down the troubling video.

"Earlier today, our teams identified and removed a deepfake video claiming to show President Zelensky issuing a statement he never did," the company's head of security policy Nathaniel Gleicher tweeted. "It appeared on a reportedly compromised website and then started showing across the internet."

"We've quickly reviewed and removed this video for violating our policy against misleading manipulated media, and notified our peers at other platforms," Gleicher added in a follow-up.

The topic of disinformation has hit fever pitch as Russian troops turn major Ukrainian cities into rubble. Hackers are waging a secondary war online, taking down government websites and interfering with military operations.

It's not even the only deepfake video to surface today, with a similar video of a deepfaked Russian president Vladimir Putin declaring victory also making the rounds.

Meanwhile, Russia is shutting itself off from the world. The news comes after both Facebook and Instagram were completely blocked by Russian authorities earlier this month.

But without major social media platforms, Russia has cut off a massive distribution channel of its own state propaganda as well.

It's unclear, notably, if the deepfake video actually had its targeted effect of sowing confusion or even convincing Ukrainians to surrender to the enemy. Whether a deepfake ever will remains an open question.

READ MORE: Hackers drop deepfake of Zelenskyy ordering troops to surrender on Ukrainian news site [Daily Dot]

More on Ukraine: Space Conference Censors Name of First Human in Space Because He Was Russian. A video circulating online purportedly shows Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky telling his countrymen to surrender to Russia — but experts say the footage isn’t real.

The 68-second deepfake clip appeared Wednesday on social media platforms, seemingly showing the 44-year-old leader saying his tenure as president has “not been easy” while staring intently into a camera.

“It is time to face the truth,” Zelensky appeared to say on the manipulated clip. “It didn’t work out … There is no more future. At least for me.”

The heavily doctored clip continues with the Ukrainian president seemingly telling his citizens to surrender.

“And now I’m taking another hard decision to say goodbye to you,” the clip went on. “I advise you to lay down your arms and return to your families. You shouldn’t die in this war.

“I advise you to live, and I’m going to do the same,” the fake footage concludes.

Meta’s head of security policy tweeted Wednesday that its teams had identified and removed the deepfake video.

6 A deepfake video of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky urging the people of Ukraine to surrender to Russia emerged on the web but was swiftly taken down. UKRINFORM/ Ukrinform/Future Publishing via Getty Images

“It appeared on a reportedly compromised website and then started showing across the internet,” Nathaniel Gleicher wrote. “We’ve quickly reviewed and removed this video for violating our policy against misleading manipulated media, and notified our peers at other platforms.”

The video and its subsequent uploads have also been removed from YouTube for violating the company’s misinformation policies, a spokesperson told CNN.

Twitter is tracking down how the footage was shared on its platform as well — and taking “enforcement action” where appropriate, a spokesperson told the network.

6 A fake and heavily manipulated video depicting Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy circulated on social media and was placed on a Ukrainian news website by hackers.

6 University of California-Berkeley professor Hany Farid said the video could be the start of Russia’s cyber war with Ukraine.

6 Experts say it could lead some Ukrainians to not believe what they see when Zelensky goes on television next.

The actual Zelensky, appeared in a video posted to Twitter on Wednesday by Ukraine’s Ministry of Defense saying he would not surrender in the ongoing fight against Russian troops.

“We are at home and defending Ukraine,” a defiant Zelensky said. “We are not going to lay down any weapons. To our victory.”

It’s unclear who created the rendering, but it was placed on a Ukrainian news website by hackers Wednesday. The footage then circulated prominently on social media in Russia, NPR reported.

6 It’s unclear who created the clip, but it was placed on a Ukrainian news website by hackers Wednesday. The footage then circulated prominently on social media in Russia. Ukrainian Presidency/Handout/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images

Digital media forensics experts told NPR the deepfake — while not entirely well done — could represent just the beginning of Russia’s misinformation war.

Get the latest updates in the Russia-Ukraine conflict with The Post’s live coverage.

“This is the first one we’ve seen that really got some legs, but I suspect it’s the tip of the iceberg,” University of California-Berkeley professor Hany Farid said. “It pollutes the information ecosystem, and it casts a shadow on all content, which is already dealing with the complex fog of war.”

Farid said it could lead some Ukrainians to not believe what they see when Zelensky goes on television next and ask themselves, “Wait a minute — is this real?”

6 The real Volodymyr Zelensky appeared in a video posted to Twitter on Wednesday by Ukraine’s Ministry of Defense saying he would not surrender in the ongoing fight against Russian troops. UKRINFORM/ Ukrinform/Future Publishing via Getty Images

The low-quality recording was the first sign something was amiss, Farid told CNN. Zelensky as seen in the video also looks straight ahead the entire time without moving his arms — which would’ve been harder to convincingly pull off, he said.

Another expert from Witness, a Brooklyn-based human rights group, said the video wasn’t especially believable — even to untrained eyes. Other viewers online noted Zelensky’s accent seemed off and his head and voice didn’t appear to be authentic, NPR reported.

“The deepfake is not very well done,” Sam Gregory of the nonprofit group told NPR.. Those are textbook strategies for defending against a threat as new as political deepfakes. Preparation and rapid response were at the heart of a playbook for defeating deepfakes that the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace released for political campaigns ahead of the 2020 US presidential election.

Zelensky also benefited from his position as one of the highest-profile people in the world and the deepfake’s poor quality. The deepfake presidential double looked unnatural, with a face that didn’t match its body, and its voice sounded different from that of its target.

Other conflicts and political leaders may be less fortunate, and could be more vulnerable to disruption by deepfakes, says Sam Gregory, who works on deepfakes policy at the nonprofit Witness.

Zelensky’s high profile helped Ukraine’s deepfake warning two weeks ago win international news coverage, and it also helped his quick response on Wednesday to spread rapidly. His prominence may also have prompted a quick response to the video from social networking companies. Meta spokesperson Aaron Simpson declined to say how it detected the video; so did YouTube’s Choi. The statement provided by Twitter’s Kennedy credited unspecified “external investigative reporting.”

Not all people targeted by deepfakes will be able to react as nimbly as Zelensky—or find their repudiation so widely trusted. “Ukraine was well positioned to do this,” Gregory says. “This is very different from other cases, where even a poorly made deepfake can create uncertainty about authenticity.”

Gregory points to a video that appeared in Myanmar last year, which appeared to show a former government minister held in detention saying he provided cash and gold to the country’s former leader Aung San Suu Kyi.

The military government that displaced Aung San Suu Kyi in a coup used that footage to accuse her of corruption. But in the video the former minister’s face and voice were distorted, causing many journalists and citizens to suggest the clip was faked.

Technical analysis has not resolved the mystery, in part because the video is of low quality, and because the former minister and others familiar with the truth don’t speak as freely or to as large an audience as Zelensky could on Wednesday. While automatic deepfake detectors could someday help combat bad actors, they’re still a work in progress.

Deepfakes are still generally used more for titillation or harassment than grand deception, especially as they become easier to create. A deepfake of Russian president Vladimir Putin circulated on Twitter this week as well, although it was identified as inauthentic from the start. The Zelensky deepfake and accompanying hacks, though, could represent a troubling new frontier. The quick and successful response to the clip highlights how, with a few tweaks and better timing, a deepfake attack could be an effective political weapon.

“If this was a more professional video and had been released early on in a more successful Russian advance on Kyiv, it could have created a lot of confusion,” says Samuel Bendett, who tracks Russian defense technology at the nonprofit CNA. As deepfake technology continues to get easier to access and more convincing, Zelensky is unlikely to be the last political leader targeted by fake video.

More Great WIRED Stories. Deepfake video of Zelenskyy could be 'tip of the iceberg' in info war, experts warn

Enlarge this image toggle caption AP AP

A fake and heavily manipulated video depicting Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy circulated on social media and was placed on a Ukrainian news website by hackers Wednesday before it was debunked and removed.

The video, which shows a rendering of the Ukrainian president appearing to tell his soldiers to lay down their arms and surrender the fight against Russia, is a so-called deepfake that ran about a minute long.

It is not yet clear who created the deepfake, but government officials in Ukraine have been warning for weeks about the possibility of Russia spreading manipulated videos as part of its information warfare. Ukraine's military intelligence agency released a video this month about how state-sponsored deepfakes could be used to sow panic and confusion.

While the video shows a passable lip-sync, viewers quickly pointed out that Zelenskyy's accent was off and that his head and voice did not appear authentic upon close inspection.

Officials at Facebook, YouTube and Twitter said the video was removed from their platforms for violating policies. On Russian social media, meanwhile, the deceptive video was boosted.

"This is the first one we've seen that really got some legs, but I suspect it's the tip of the iceberg," said Hany Farid, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley who is an expert in digital media forensics.

In a video posted to his Telegram channel, Zelenskyy responded to the fake video by saying: "We are defending our land, our children, our families. So we don't plan to lay down any arms. Until our victory."

The message was not just displayed across social media, however. It also appeared briefly on television in Ukraine and on a news broadcaster's website.

The national television station Ukraine 24 confirmed that hackers managed to send the fake Zelenskyy message across live television on the scrolling-text news crawl known as "the ticker," and the video showed up briefly on the news station's website. It was the work of "enemy hackers," the station said.

The messages the hackers managed to broadcast through Ukraine 24 urged Ukrainians to stop fighting and give up their weapons. They also falsely stated that Zelenskyy had fled Kyiv, according to the Atlantic Council's Eurasia researcher Roman Osadchuk.

The messages were amplified on VKontakte, the social network comparable to Facebook that is popular in Russia and controlled by allies of the Kremlin, Osadchuk noted.

Researchers said that despite the deepfake not being particularly sophisticated, it should still be considered dangerous.

"The deepfake is not very well done," said Sam Gregory of the human rights group Witness, which specializes in detecting inauthentic media in crises.

He said the Ukrainian government getting out in front of the deepfake by warning about manipulated videos weeks before this one was released, as well as Zelenskyy himself quickly saying it was a fake, helped slow its spread in the West, but it is possible that lower-quality versions of the video could take on a life of their own in other parts of the world.

"If you look at other contexts globally where the deepfake is poor quality, or of good enough quality to create room for doubt, and it's not so easy to challenge it directly," Gregory said.

Furthermore, the video, regardless of where it came from and its quality, could potentially make some people question the veracity of videos of Zelenskyy in the future, researchers said.

"The particular issue is also around the so-called liar's dividend, where it's easy to claim a true video is falsified and place the onus on people to prove it's authentic," Gregory said.

Farid added: "It pollutes the information ecosystem, and it casts a shadow on all content, which is already dealing with the complex fog of war," he said. "The next time the president goes on television, some people might think, 'Wait a minute — is this real?' "

A Twitter spokeswoman said the company will allow the video in instances where it was shared to expose it as a fake. But if the video is being posted to deceive people, it will be taken down, the company said.

NPR's Shannon Bond contributed to this report.. 