Tesla has brought back its Full Self- Driving (FSD) profiles around three months after pulling the feature from an October update. The three driving profiles, labeled “Chill” “Average” and “Assertive,” dictate the ways FSD equipped Tesla’s behave in certain scenarios and the amount of risk the vehicles may take when making decisions. Images of the profile settings, first highlighted by The Verge, show in-vehicle descriptions associated with the settings which dictate the vehicle’s follow distance, and frequency of lane changes.

Tesla Investors Not Happy With Mr. Tweet's Tweets CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video Tesla Investors Not Happy With Mr. Tweet's Tweets

Advertisement

Of particular interest here is FSD’s assertive profile, which, according to the images, will “have a smaller follow distance, perform more frequent speed lane changes, will not exit passing lanes and may perform more rolling stops.” Tesla’s wording around rolling stops here remains unclear, particularly since rolling stops at stop signs in the U.S. are generally illegal. Gizmodo reached out to Tesla for comment but has not heard back.

The “Chill” profile, by contrast, aims to have Teslas maintain a larger following distance and perform fewer speed lane changes, according to images posted by Twitter user @digitalhen. FSD’s “Average” profile unsurprisingly strives to strike a middle ground, though like assertive, it may also engage in more rolling stops.

Advertisement

FSD profiles were part of an over-the-air update Tesla pushed late last year but were quickly pulled after CEO Elon Musk reported, “seeing some issues” which briefly left some drivers unable to access the FSD feature at all.

Advertisement

Striking a balance between public safety and personal driver convenience remains one of the thorniest dilemmas for autonomous vehicle development, a tradeoff dictated as much by philosophy as technical performance. To put that into perspective, one of the top rallying cries amongst autonomous vehicles’ supporters revolves around the argument that more AVs on roads will reduce crashes since the majority of those crashes currently result from human error. However, a 2020 study from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) estimated AV systems may only eliminate around a third of car crashes if those systems were designed to drive in ways that resemble humans, as FSD’s assertive mode appears to.

Instead, the report determined AV systems would need to be designed to prioritize safety over rider preferences if the grandest promises of AV safety are to ever become reality. Though crashes resulting from “sensing and perceiving errors” and incapacitation (factors self-driving vehicles would presumably solve for) accounted for 23% and 10% of total crashes respectively in the IIHS study, another 40% were the result of planning and deciding errors like speeding and illegal maneuvers, which aren’t necessarily solved simply by moving towards autonomous systems.

Advertisement

“Building self-driving cars that drive as well as people do is a big challenge in itself,” IIHS Research Scientist and lead author of the study Alexandra Mueller said in a statement. “But they’d actually need to be better than that to deliver on the promises we’ve all heard.”

Tesla’s foray into assertive driving comes despite mounting scrutiny into FSD and Tesla’s Autopilot driver assistance feature from regulators and safety advocates The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration opened a formal probe into Autopilot last summer following rising cases of vehicles equipped with the automated system colliding with emergency response vehicles. The company was also criticized by the head of the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board late last year for its efforts to expand the FSD beta to more drivers before addressing “basic safety issues.” The first serious crash involving FSD appears to have occurred in November, according to a complaint filed with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

Advertisement

None of that has seemed to deter Tesla from its FSD expansion. In fact, last week Musk announced his company would raise the FSD price to $12,000— up from the previous $10,000 price tag—and signaled further price increases may follow.. Tesla’s Full Self-Driving (FSD) beta lets you choose from three driving “profiles” that dictate how the car will react to certain situations on the road. Each mode, “Chill,” “Average,” and “Assertive,” varies in terms of aggressiveness (and potentially safety).

A separate image posted to Twitter gives us a more detailed glimpse at what this actually means. In the description beneath the “Assertive” option, Tesla notes the vehicle will “have a smaller follow distance” and “perform more frequent speed lane changes.” The vehicle will also “not exit passing lanes” and “may perform rolling stops,” and it’s not entirely clear whether this means cars won’t come to a full stop at stop signs.

A YouTube video shows all three modes in action, and towards the end, it shows how Tesla describes each FSD profile. In “Chill” mode, the vehicle will “have a larger follow distance and perform fewer speed lane changes,” while “Average” mode means the car “will have a medium follow distance and may perform rolling stops.” That said, it’s a bit hard to distinguish the difference between these modes from this video alone, as it doesn’t test out the vehicle’s behavior in heavy traffic or harsh weather conditions.. Profiles are back in Tesla’s latest “Full Self-Driving” beta 10.3 with an “Assertive Mode” that may perform rolling stops and other borderline maneuvers, The Verge has reported. The update was originally released in October 2021 with three profiles (“Chill,” “Average” and “Assertive”), but was pulled just two days later over issues with traffic light left turns, unexpected stopping and more.

The latest update issued yesterday shows that the Full Self-Driving (Beta) profiles are back. If you choose “Assertive,” the notes state that “in this profile, your Model X will have a smaller follow distance, perform more frequent speed lane changes, will not exit passing lanes and may perform rolling stops.” As @Digitalhen notes, the system may also perform rolling stops even in “Average” mode.

I guess "Road Rage Mode" didn't fit on the screen pic.twitter.com/6pJNFvrJXA — David Zipper (@DavidZipper) January 9, 2022

Generally, a rolling stop means a vehicle doesn’t come to a complete halt at a stop sign (which is illegal and dangerous) but it’s not yet clear if that’s what FSD will do. It’s also illegal in many states to stay in the left or passing lane if you’re not passing anyone, and of course, it’s never a great idea to follow the vehicle ahead too closely. All of that said, the mode hasn’t been tested enough yet to demonstrate exactly how it’s doing those things.

On the weekend, CEO Elon Musk announced that Tesla would be raising the price of FSD from $10,000 to $12,000, even though it’s still in beta. As we’ve pointed out before, the name “Full Self-Driving” is misleading (much like Autopilot), as FSD does not offer true Level 4 self-driving, but simply Level 2 advanced driver assistance.. Drivers using Tesla‘s Full Self-Driving (FSD) beta can now choose between three different driving profiles that will determine how the car will react to various situations on the road. Tesla is offering a “Chill,” “Average” and “Assertive” mode that has different degrees of aggressiveness and possibly safety.

According to Not a Tesla App feature was initially pulled from the 10.3 version in October 2021 but Tesla recently issued a 10.3.1 update that included a revamped iteration of the FSD profiles. The notes also indicated that the FSD profiles were meant as a way “to control behaviors like rolling stops, speed-based lane changes, following distance and yellow light headway.

One Twitter user posted an image that showed Tesla’s description of the “Assertive” mode. Tesla writes, “In this profile your Model X will have a smaller follow distance, perform more frequent speed lane changes, will not exit passing lanes and may perform rolling stops.” The latter part of the sentence that stated that the car might “perform rolling stops” caught the attention of onlookers who have indicated that they are unsure if this means that the car will not obey the rules of a stop sign.

A YouTube video posted online showed how the three modes work and how they differed from one another. It appears that in “Chill” mode the vehicle has “a larger follow distance and perform fewer speed lane changes.” In “Average” mode, there is medium distance and might also be performing rolling stops. The video still was unable to pinpoint the distinctive difference between the three nor can audiences tell if it means that the car will not come to a full halt in “Average” and “Assertive” mode.

Tesla’s FSD feature does not make the vehicle fully autonomous. Since FSD beta rolled out in September last year, the EV brand has faced many controversies that have yet to be solved.

I guess “Road Rage Mode” didn’t fit on the screen pic.twitter.com/6pJNFvrJXA — David Zipper (@DavidZipper) January 9, 2022

No need to be Assertive to do rolling stops, you can just be Average https://t.co/VJQmSdix5h — David Zipper (@DavidZipper) January 9, 2022

In other Tesla news, the EV company is raising its prices for full self driving once again.