. TAIPEI (Taiwan News) — A Tesla driving on autopilot on National Highway 1 barely missed a pedestrian and collided into an overturned truck on Monday (June 1).

At 6:35 a.m. on Monday (June 1), a delivery truck overturned at the 268.3-kilometer mark, and its 34-year-old driver, surnamed Yeh (葉), stepped out onto the highway near the median to wait for a salvage vehicle. At 6:44 a.m., a white Tesla sedan suddenly roared down the road completely ignoring the driver, who had to leap out of the way to avoid being struck, reported UDN.

The driver of the Tesla then apparently noticed the delivery truck directly ahead and finally slammed on the brakes. However, it was too late, and the electric vehicle plowed halfway into the cargo area of the truck.





Traffic camera footage showing puff of smoke as car applies brakes. (NHPB image)

The National Highway Police Bureau (NHPB) said the driver of the Tesla was a 53-year-old man surnamed Huang (黃), who claimed that he had set the car to run on autopilot at a speed of 110 kilometers per hour prior to the accident. He said he had thought that under autopilot mode, the car would detect any obstacles and slow down or stop, but it continued to maintain a steady speed.

He said that once he realized the car was not going react to the truck, he stepped on the brakes at the last second. Unfortunately, by the time he applied the brakes, there was not enough room to fully decelerate or avoid the vehicle.

Yeh confessed to the NHPB that he had been trailing a car very closely and that when it suddenly decelerated, he said he did not have enough time to apply the brakes. To avoid smashing into the car, he swerved, causing the truck to roll over.





(NHPB photo)

Huang said that he had placed a sign 100 meters behind the vehicle to warn motorists of the overturned truck. He said that most vehicles decelerated and switched lanes, so he was shocked when the Tesla continued to hurtle forward.

In traffic camera footage of the accident, the white Tesla can be seen making a beeline for the truck driver as he stands in the inside lane. As it becomes clear that the Tesla will not stop or even decelerate, the driver jumps out of the way.

A light puff of smoke can be seen as the car applies the brakes to some extent, but its speed does not diminish much and it crashes into the truck. One Tesla owner surnamed Chen (陳), speculated that based on the footage, the car's sensors apparently could not detect the odd shape of the overturned truck, and the braking system only kicked in at the last moment, thus causing the accident, according to the report.





Front of car covered in sauce carried by truck. (NHPB photo)

Fortunately, Huang was wearing a seatbelt at the time of the accident and did not suffer any serious injures, and Yeh also came away from both accidents unscathed. Police say that both men submitted to breathalyzer tests and that neither had alcohol in their systems, reported CNA.

China Times cited a car expert as saying that Tesla's "automatic brake function" is actually only for "moving vehicles." If it encounters a stationary object, the function will only provide a prompt and will not stop automatically.

Other Tesla car owners suggested a couple of other possible causes for this accident: The Tesla's sensors did not detect the truck because it is painted white, or perhaps the reflection of the sun makes it difficult to scan.

Police are still investigating the exact cause of the accident.

On its website, Tesla explains that although the autopilot has steering and braking capabilities, it does not make the vehicle autonomous and is only meant to be used when the driver is "fully attentive" and prepared to take the wheel at any time.. Today, a video that surfaced on Twitter shows a Tesla Model 3 driving, without waiver or interruption, directly into a flipped-over truck on the highway. The clip, which occurred in Taiwan, has some viewers questioning and speculating what happened to the driver, if he was paying attention, and if any Tesla safety functions were in use at the time.

The incident occurred this morning on National Freeway 1 in Taiwan. According to cna.com.tw, a box truck carrying salad and breakfast ingredients lost control and flipped over. While the driver of the truck stood on the side of the road waiting for assistance, a Tesla Model 3 came into the picture driving in the inside-most lane straight for the truck. Despite the truck downed on the highway in the middle of a clear and sunny day, the Tesla did not flinch and plowed into the top of the box.

Only one person was in the Model 3, and he was not seriously injured. More angles of the crash are seen here:

side better quality pic.twitter.com/9r3HpAdBzD — hand washing rooster 🐓 (@jsin86524368) June 1, 2020

According to a roughly translated excerpt from CNA, the driver was expecting the car to brake without his input.

"The police said that the driver of the Tesla electric vehicle, Huang, claimed to have the vehicle assist system turned on, and the speed was fixed at 110 kilometers per hour," the article says. "He thought that the car itself would detect the obstacle and automatically brake, but he was surprised that the car did not slow down."

From this passage, it sounds like the driver was using either adaptive cruise control or some form of Tesla's Autopilot driving assistance technology, though it was not directly named or confirmed. This type of speculation sprouts from Tesla's previous issues with its Autopilot system, which is not autonomous nor self-driving. Autopilot remains a safety-focused driver assistance program that requires driver attention at all times. Self-driving cars do not exist yet.

Earlier this year, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration found Tesla at fault for not providing enough Autopilot safeguards after a deadly Tesla crash. Visit CNA or ET Today for more information or photos.