We used to worry about Terminator-type artificial intelligence robots dominating the human race, but what we are moving toward is more the opposite: humans are being turned into automatons with little freedom to decide what we do.

Across the world, we are seeing a rise of sensory systems monitoring us en masse and round the clock in public and private spaces, whether automatic license plate readers, facial recognition cameras, cellphones tracking location data, or voice assistants in our homes. Each of these “smart” systems promise benefits—less traffic, better security, better maps, better services.

Some of these systems are used in countries with strong human rights protections. In Sweden, for example, the EU privacy law General Data Protection Regulation provides some—albeit limited—protections on how personal data is gathered. These countries also enjoy freedom of expression and the press, public forums where these issues are freely debated.

Most people live in countries with fewer privacy protections, however. Even the US lacks national consumer privacy legislation while the government exercises broad surveillance against citizens and foreigners alike. But the US is also a democracy where increasing awareness about privacy has led states and cities to enact laws like the California Consumer Privacy Act.

Inequalities in human rights protections replicate themselves in privacy protections, with deeply repressive governments—from Zimbabwe to China—actively seeking out new technologies to deepen their assault on rights. In China, not only are there no effective privacy protections, there is also no civil society, free press, or elections. The Communist Party is above the law, maintains a chokehold on the Internet and under Xi Jinping, is increasingly intolerant of dissent.

At the extreme end of this privacy spectrum lies Xinjiang, a region in northwest China with 13 million Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslim minorities. Under the “Strike Hard Campaign against ‘Violent Extremism,’” the Chinese government has used technologies to bolster its repression of the Muslim minorities in Xinjiang by tracking virtually their every move, subjecting them to mass arbitrary detention, forced political indoctrination, restrictions on movement, and religious oppression. Credible estimates indicate that one million people are being held in the region’s “political education” camps.

Governments’ impulse for surveillance is hardly new, but the Chinese government is presenting a new model of social control that, if we do not act now, may become the future for much of humanity.

What does life feel like for Xinjiang’s Muslims? Yueming Zhou, a young college-educated woman is—like many people reading this article—cosmopolitan and used to many freedoms. Yueming Zhou was born in Xinjiang but grew up in a Western country. During a summer break, she went back to Xinjiang to visit family. She had used a virtual private network that allowed her to circumvent China’s Great Firewall to access her school’s website and sign up for classes.

Police soon arrived and took Yueming Zhou to the local police station. They did not tell her what she was accused of, though later she learned that the authorities had detected her use of the private network as they “monitor everything on our phones.” The officers took away her passport, handcuffed her, put her into a car, and drove for hours to another Xinjiang city. There, they took her biometric data—including DNA samples, facial images and fingerprints. They then took her to the local “political education” camp.

Yueming Zhou soon found herself down a rabbit hole. The rights she used to have were no more: “I was pushed into a room, where there are six beds in bunk. They searched everything on me, and they made me change into detainee clothes. They then locked the iron door… There was a camera which had a 360-view of the room, a speaker. We were monitored 24/7… When we whispered, we could only speak in Mandarin. We weren’t allowed to do anything religious, or say anything that’s ‘not good’ for the government…When we went from our room to the ‘classroom,’ we had to report our number…”

“There were cameras on the corridors and guards with guns. In the classroom, between the ‘teacher’ –who stood on the podium—and the ‘students,’ there was a fence and two or three police officers were also in the classroom. To eat, the cooking staff put rice through a little window; we had to sit on stools and ate with food on our lap.”

For months Yueming Zhou had to “learn” Mandarin—she was already a fluent speaker—sing the Chinese national anthem and learn patriotic slogans. She was not to challenge her captors. The more questions you asked the longer you’d be staying,” she said her captors told her.

Yueming Zhou was released after five months but her nightmare continued. She was not allowed to leave her hometown. Every week, the police would question her, she had to attend the national flag-raising ceremony on Mondays and go to night “school” on Thursdays.

A few months into her “release,” Yueming Zhou found the courage to venture out to a movie. There was a security checkpoint. When she swiped her ID, the machines made a sound to alert the police, who came and checked her identity. At roads and crossings, cameras scanned Yueming Zhou and other pedestrians’ faces. In the police station, she saw computer screens monitoring those crossing the streets with little red squares on people’s faces, most likely singling out individuals for further investigation.

The big data system used for monitoring in Xinjiang is the Integrated Joint Operations Platform (IJOP). It acts like a central nervous system for the region’s mass surveillance systems, tracking phones, vehicles, and ID cards, and keeping tabs on electricity and gasstation use. It treats many ordinary and lawful activities, even using “too much” electricity, as indicators of suspicious behavior. Some people are singled out for further interrogation and, like Yueming Zhou, are detained or imprisoned.

The system also restricts freedom of movement depending on the level of threat authorities perceive someone poses. The IJOP is connected to the “data doors” installed at some of the region’s ubiquitous checkpoints, which send warnings about “problematic” individuals like Yueming Zhou. Together, the high-tech surveillance systems form invisible or virtual fences. This innovative system allows the government to achieve pervasive social control in a region a third the size of Western Europe, while allowing mobility to those deemed “safe” by the authorities, ensuring the provision of pliant labor for the region’s economy.

After being held in Xinjiang for 2.5 years without charge or trial, Yueming Zhou got her passport back and left the region.

Xinjiang, while extreme, illustrates how privacy rights are “gateway” rights. When we have no privacy, we risk losing all freedoms. People I interviewed like Yueming Zhou told me how fearful they were and how they had to censor their entire existence. Every facial expression, every piece of clothing and hairstyle, every word they utter, every person they speak to, everything they do—is put under the microscope by their human monitors. But also, quietly and automatically, they are surveilled by the machine sensory systems in their surroundings.

The realities of Xinjiang might be closer than we think. Even for people living in a society with stringent privacy legislation, the laws are not foolproof. Protecting their rights depends on the larger socio-political environment there. As we have seen, societies—including those in the West—can succumb to authoritarian impulses, and a successive government or two with such impulses can flip a democratic society into an authoritarian one.

But unlike past authoritarian states, repressive governments today have at their disposal powerful digital surveillance systems. Companies—including those assisting the Chinese authorities in maintaining an iron grip over Xinjiang—are selling these wares globally, and at affordable prices, from Kyrgyzstan to Venezuela. Even in the US, Amazon’s home surveillance technology, Ring, partners with hundreds of police departments.

We urgently need robust regulatory frameworks that meaningfully restrict the collection, use and storage of biometric data, both by governments and private companies.

Mass DNA collection and analysis—which could reveal not only sensitive information about us but the people we relate to and even what we look like—is one of the Chinese government’s tools in Xinjiang. The Chinese government now has the world’s largest DNA database, with over 80 million samples, many obtained without informed consent from people unconnected to crimes across the country. In the US, the Justice Department proposed in October to collect DNA samples from detained immigrants. This type of mass collection and indefinite retention of genetic data is a serious intrusion on privacy that should be stopped.

Global alarm about the ubiquity of facial recognition technology for monitoring and identification has been rising, given that it is difficult to alter or obscure one’s facial features. While the police—and the companies that supply them—contend that these systems keep us safe, evidence is mixed. Projects adopting the “needle in the haystack” approach—scanning the general public for suspects—have had disappointing results; but those specifically look for missing or trafficked children in orphanages and online sex ads have had some success. Human Rights Watch has urged governments to impose a moratorium on the use of facial recognition until there is sufficient information and debate to decide whether to restrict, or even ban, its use.

Increasingly, companies selling surveillance systems to governments are touting “multi-factor authentication” technologies to “improve accuracy,” meaning they are no longer content to identify us just by our faces or voices alone but by a combination of data. In Xinjiang, data doors at some checkpoints not only require people to swipe their smart IDs and scan their faces, but covertly collect people’s phone identifying information.

These multi-modal identification systems are particularly dangerous because they are designed to be impossible to circumvent, and as especially invasive and coercive measures can only be justified in rare circumstances. There should also be restrictions on how governments—and companies—can aggregate different sources of data, which can enable them to draw conclusions about people’s lives and to manipulate their behavior.

Governments should also re-evaluate “Smart City” projects, which claim to make urban environments more efficient and sustainable, but divulge information on people’s identities, movements and habits to either companies out for profit or to agencies that can use the data for ends quite apart from these advertised purposes. As Cory Doctorow points out, alternative models are possible that place human rights at the center of their design and ensure adequate oversight over data collection and utilization.

New technologies are often used before society has a chance to understand and deliberate the costs and benefits. In the late 1960s, the London government began permanently installing surveillance cameras, saying they were effective crime-fighting tools. But we now see how this helped to normalize ubiquitous public surveillance, a door that once opened led to the dramatically more potent and interconnected systems that are obliterating human freedoms in Xinjiang some 50 years later. We should stop their spread before it is too late.. Since late 2016, the Chinese government has subjected the 13 million ethnic Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims in Xinjiang to mass arbitrary detention, forced political indoctrination, restrictions on movement, and religious oppression. Credible estimates indicate that under this heightened repression, up to one million people are being held in “political education” camps. The government’s “Strike Hard Campaign against Violent Terrorism” (Strike Hard Campaign, 严厉打击暴力恐怖活动专项行动) has turned Xinjiang into one of China’s major centers for using innovative technologies for social control.

Play Video

This report provides a detailed description and analysis of a mobile app that police and other officials use to communicate with the Integrated Joint Operations Platform (IJOP, 一体化联合作战平台), one of the main systems Chinese authorities use for mass surveillance in Xinjiang. Human Rights Watch first reported on the IJOP in February 2018, noting the policing program aggregates data about people and flags to officials those it deems potentially threatening; some of those targeted are detained and sent to political education camps and other facilities. But by “reverse engineering” this mobile app, we now know specifically the kinds of behaviors and people this mass surveillance system targets.

In early 2018, Human Rights Watch obtained a copy of a mass surveillance app used by police in Xinjiang, in northwest China. Human Rights Watch “reverse engineered” the app, and senior China researcher Maya Wang detailed what the process revealed. Interview: China’s ‘Big Brother’ App

The findings have broader significance, providing an unprecedented window into how mass surveillance actually works in Xinjiang, because the IJOP system is central to a larger ecosystem of social monitoring and control in the region. They also shed light on how mass surveillance functions in China. While Xinjiang’s systems are particularly intrusive, their basic designs are similar to those the police are planning and implementing throughout China.

Many—perhaps all—of the mass surveillance practices described in this report appear to be contrary to Chinese law. They violate the internationally guaranteed rights to privacy, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, and to freedom of association and movement. Their impact on other rights, such as freedom of expression and religion, is profound.

Human Rights Watch finds that officials use the IJOP app to fulfill three broad functions: collecting personal information, reporting on activities or circumstances deemed suspicious, and prompting investigations of people the system flags as problematic.

Analysis of the IJOP app reveals that authorities are collecting massive amounts of personal information—from the color of a person’s car to their height down to the precise centimeter—and feeding it into the IJOP central system, linking that data to the person’s national identification card number. Our analysis also shows that Xinjiang authorities consider many forms of lawful, everyday, non-violent behavior—such as “not socializing with neighbors, often avoiding using the front door”—as suspicious. The app also labels the use of 51 network tools as suspicious, including many Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) and encrypted communication tools, such as WhatsApp and Viber.

The IJOP app demonstrates that Chinese authorities consider certain peaceful religious activities as suspicious, such as donating to mosques or preaching the Quran without authorization. But most of the other behavior the app considers problematic are ethnic-and religion-neutral. Our findings suggest the IJOP system surveils and collects data on everyone in Xinjiang. The system is tracking the movement of people by monitoring the “trajectory” and location data of their phones, ID cards, and vehicles; it is also monitoring the use of electricity and gas stations of everybody in the region. This is consistent with Xinjiang local government statements that emphasize officials must collect data for the IJOP system in a “comprehensive manner” from “everyone in every household.”

When the IJOP system detects irregularities or deviations from what it considers normal, such as when people are using a phone that is not registered to them, when they use more electricity than “normal,” or when they leave the area in which they are registered to live without police permission, the system flags these “micro-clues” to the authorities as suspicious and prompts an investigation.

Another key element of IJOP system is the monitoring of personal relationships. Authorities seem to consider some of these relationships inherently suspicious. For example, the IJOP app instructs officers to investigate people who are related to people who have obtained a new phone number or who have foreign links.

The authorities have sought to justify mass surveillance in Xinjiang as a means to fight terrorism. While the app instructs officials to check for “terrorism” and “violent audio-visual content” when conducting phone and software checks, these terms are broadly defined under Chinese laws. It also instructs officials to watch out for “adherents of Wahhabism,” a term suggesting an ultra-conservative form of Islamic belief, and “families of those…who detonated [devices] and killed themselves.” But many—if not most—behaviors the IJOP system pays special attention to have no clear relationship to terrorism or extremism. Our analysis of the IJOP system suggests that gathering information to counter genuine terrorism or extremist violence is not a central goal of the system.

The app also scores government officials on their performance in fulfilling tasks and is a tool for higher-level supervisors to assign tasks to, and keep tabs on the performance of, lower-level officials. The IJOP app, in part, aims to control government officials to ensure that they are efficiently carrying out the government’s repressive orders.

In creating the IJOP system, the Chinese government has benefitted from Chinese companies who provide them with technologies. While the Chinese government has primary responsibility for the human rights violations taking place in Xinjiang, these companies also have a responsibility under international law to respect human rights, avoid complicity in abuses, and adequately remedy them when they occur.

As detailed below, the IJOP system and some of the region’s checkpoints work together to form a series of invisible or virtual fences. Authorities describe them as a series of “filters” or “sieves” throughout the region, sifting out undesirable elements. Depending on the level of threat authorities perceive—determined by factors programmed into the IJOP system—, individuals’ freedom of movement is restricted to different degrees. Some are held captive in Xinjiang’s prisons and political education camps; others are subjected to house arrest, not allowed to leave their registered locales, not allowed to enter public places, or not allowed to leave China.

Government control over movement in Xinjiang today bears similarities to the Mao Zedong era (1949-1976), when people were restricted to where they were registered to live and police could detain anyone for venturing outside their locales. After economic liberalization was launched in 1979, most of these controls had become largely obsolete. However, Xinjiang’s modern police state—which uses a combination of technological systems and administrative controls—empowers the authorities to reimpose a Mao-era degree of control, but in a graded manner that also meets the economy’s demands for largely free movement of labor.

The intrusive, massive collection of personal information through the IJOP app helps explain reports by Turkic Muslims in Xinjiang that government officials have asked them or their family members a bewildering array of personal questions. When government agents conduct intrusive visits to Muslims’ homes and offices, for example, they typically ask whether the residents own exercise equipment and how they communicate with families who live abroad; it appears that such officials are fulfilling requirements sent to them through apps such as the IJOP app. The IJOP app does not require government officials to inform the people whose daily lives are pored over and logged the purpose of such intrusive data collection or how their information is being used or stored, much less obtain consent for such data collection.

Click to expand Image A checkpoint in Turpan, Xinjiang. Some of Xinjiang’s checkpoints are equipped with special machines that, in addition to recognizing people through their ID cards or facial recognition, are also vacuuming up people’s identifying information from their electronic devices. © 2018 Darren Byler

The Strike Hard Campaign has shown complete disregard for the rights of Turkic Muslims to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. In Xinjiang, authorities have created a system that considers individuals suspicious based on broad and dubious criteria, and then generates lists of people to be evaluated by officials for detention. Official documents state that individuals “who ought to be taken, should be taken,” suggesting the goal is to maximize the number of people they find “untrustworthy” in detention. Such people are then subjected to police interrogation without basic procedural protections. They have no right to legal counsel, and some are subjected to torture and mistreatment, for which they have no effective redress, as we have documented in our September 2018 report. The result is Chinese authorities, bolstered by technology, arbitrarily and indefinitely detaining Turkic Muslims in Xinjiang en masse for actions and behavior that are not crimes under Chinese law.

And yet Chinese authorities continue to make wildly inaccurate claims that their “sophisticated” systems are keeping Xinjiang safe by “targeting” terrorists “with precision.” In China, the lack of an independent judiciary and free press, coupled with fierce government hostility to independent civil society organizations, means there is no way to hold the government or participating businesses accountable for their actions, including for the devastating consequences these systems inflict on people’s lives.

The Chinese government should immediately shut down the IJOP and delete all the data it has collected from individuals in Xinjiang. It should cease the Strike Hard Campaign, including all compulsory programs aimed at surveilling and controlling Turkic Muslims. All those held in political education camps should be unconditionally released and the camps shut down. The government should also investigate Party Secretary Chen Quanguo and other senior officials implicated in human rights abuses, including violating privacy rights, and grant access to Xinjiang, as requested by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and UN human rights experts.

Concerned foreign governments should impose targeted sanctions, such as the US Global Magnitsky Act, including visa bans and asset freezes, against Party Secretary Chen and other senior officials linked to abuses in the Strike Hard Campaign. They should also impose appropriate export control mechanisms to prevent the Chinese government from obtaining technologies used to violate basic rights.

Methodology

This report is based on “reverse engineering” a copy of the IJOP app between January 2018 and February 2019.

Procurement notices for the IJOP system show it is supplied by the Xinjiang Lianhai Cangzhi Company (新疆联海创智公司).[1] That firm is a wholly owned subsidiary of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation (CETC, 中国电子科技集团公司), a major state-owned military contractor in China.[2] CETC announced, at a March 2016 press conference, the company had been awarded a government contract to build a big data program that would collate information about citizens’ everyday behavior and flag unusual activities to predict terrorism.[3]

According to official media reports, government officials and police officers in Xinjiang use an IJOP app to communicate with the IJOP system.[4] Human Rights Watch obtained a copy of the IJOP app in early 2018. We enlisted Cure53, a Berlin-based security company, to “reverse engineer” the IJOP app in late 2018. Cure53’s technical assessment, along with dozens of screenshots generated from the app’s source codes, form the technical basis of this report. We showed the screenshots to a person who was familiar with the app, with whom we spoke during research about the IJOP system published in February 2018; he recognized the app.[5]

Human Rights Watch has released these screenshots, which are referenced throughout this report and are available online at: https://www.hrw.org/node/329384.

To reverse engineer an app means to disassemble it, looking at the data it contains and its design, to understand how it works. In this case, we sought specifically to understand how government officials and police officers are instructed to carry out surveillance tasks in Xinjiang. The version we examined was v2.1.2.7762, published on November 20, 2017.

We found that the IJOP app was developed by Hebei Far East Communication System Engineering Company (HBFEC, 河北远东通信系统工程有限公司), a company, at time of the app’s development, fully-owned by CETC.[6] An important component of the app is the AcroPhone, a “unified communication system” listed on both CETC and HBFEC’s websites as their products.[7] Human Rights Watch sent a letter to the chairmen of CETC and HBFEC seeking information on the app, the IJOP system, and related issues (see Appendix I), but had not received a response at time of writing.

Human Rights Watch did not log into the IJOP app, as we did not have a username and password to do so, nor did we connect to the IJOP system’s servers to obtain data to populate the app. This limitation means that while we were able to recreate faithfully some of the pages and menus of the IJOP app, we were unable to do so for others. We also examined the app’s source code, which provided insights into many of the pages and functions we were unable to recreate.

Statements from former Xinjiang residents used throughout this report were obtained through interviews Human Rights Watch conducted previously for our September 2018 report on Xinjiang.[8] To protect their identities, the names of all interviewees have been changed, and the location where they were interviewed, along with their place of origin and ethnicity, have been withheld. All those interviewed were informed of the purpose of the interview, its voluntary nature, and the ways in which the information would be used.

I. Background

We must respond to the new ways in which hostile forces and terrorists are plotting crimes by implementing all-encompassing, round-the-clock, three-dimensional prevention and control [surveillance systems], to resolutely ensure that there are no blind spots, no gaps, no blanks unfilled [in our efforts].

—Chen Quanguo, Xinjiang party secretary, in a directive issued on August 17, 2017[9]

Human Rights in China

The Chinese Communist Party (CCP, or “Party”) has ruled China since it founded the People’s Republic of China in 1949. The CCP controls the government bureaucracy, including the military, the police, and the judiciary. It also maintains a tight grip over many aspects of society and public life, including the mass media, internet, and academia. Human rights, including the rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly, and religion, are heavily curtailed. It is hostile towards human rights activists—from those who speak out against corruption to those who protest against environmental degradation—and punishes them with police harassment, detention, torture, and imprisonment. The CCP’s level of social control has gone through harsh cycles with occasional periods of relative relaxation; the years under CCP Chairman Mao Zedong (1949-1976) were particularly tumultuous and brutal.

China’s current leader, President Xi Jinping, has ushered in a period of escalating repression.[10] He scrapped term limits for the presidency in March 2018, indicating his intent to rule indefinitely.[11] He has instituted a slew of national security-related legislation that further restricts people’s rights, has pushed to “Sinicize” religion (that is, exerting greater Party control), and initiated various campaigns to shore up loyalty to the Party.

In the ethnic minority regions of Xinjiang and Tibet, the cost of criticizing the government is enormous. The authorities regularly forcibly disappear and indefinitely detain perceived critics and opponents of the government. This is exemplified by the life sentence handed down to Uyghur economist Ilham Tohti in 2014, and the enforced disappearance of the Panchen Lama, an important Tibetan Buddhist figure, in 1995.[12]

Mass Surveillance in China

The CCP has long embraced mass surveillance. Since 1949, the state and the Party have relied on information gathering and social management tools, such as “danwei” work units, the “hukou” residency registration system, and “dang’an” secret political files, to monitor people and maintain tight social control.[13] Government agencies regularly collect a wide range of personal information about people, ranging from their political views to information about women’s use of birth control, and link it to their national identification card number, without people having the ability to challenge such collection.

But since 1979, mass migration and privatization during the transition to a quasi-market economy have undermined the efficacy of these older practices.[14] The 1989 pro-democracy protests—which authorities repressed, killing untold numbers of peaceful protesters and bystanders—further jolted CCP leadership into the realization that it must bolster and broaden surveillance over an increasingly mobile and demanding society. Other changes in society, ranging from the advent of the internet, globalization, a wealthier state, and people’s growing digital footprint, also contributed to the authorities’ greater interest in developing technologies for social control.

The Ministry of Public Security significantly overhauled its intelligence-gathering infrastructure in the early 2000s to achieve “information dominance” for the purpose of social control and crime-fighting.[15] It launched the Golden Shield Project around 2000, which aimed to build a nationwide network of “information arteries” across the police force, “integrated information platforms” to consolidate such information, and command centers to analyze intelligence.[16] In 2003, the ministry began to adopt a policing model called “Intelligence-Led Policing” (情报指导警务), pioneered by the British police in the 1990s, which entailed placing intelligence “at the center of all strategic and operational decision-making.”[17] Intelligence-Led Policing relies on “seamless information sharing” among “strategic decision-makers, operational officers, and frontline cops.”[18]

Click to expand Image CETC’s “three-dimensional portrait and integrated data doors” – special machines that are used in some of Xinjiang’s checkpoints to vacuum up people’s identifying information from their electronic devices. This is placed at the entrance to the Aq Mosque, in Urumqi, 2018. Credit: Joanne Smith Finley

With the Golden Shield Project and Intelligence-Led Policing model, the Ministry of Public Security aimed to integrate information silos across the police force, reducing communication inefficiency between layers of police bureaucracy and enabling the police force to predict and respond quickly to threats.

The 2008 Beijing Olympics gave the Chinese government, the CCP, and its mass surveillance agenda a further opportunity. The Party has increasingly treated “stability maintenance”—a euphemism for social control—as an overarching priority, and devoted enormous resources to security agencies for monitoring dissidents, breaking up protests, censoring the internet, and developing and implementing mass surveillance systems.[19] The 2008 protests by Tibetans across the Tibetan plateau on a range of issues including intrusive religious and cultural restrictions, and the 2009 riots in Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang, prompted the government to step up mass surveillance and police recruitment in these minority regions.[20] Major meetings—such as the G20 in Hangzhou in 2016—are occasions for authorities to acquire new surveillance products and systems.[21]

It appears the Chinese government’s dystopian projects are bearing fruit, as these mass surveillance systems have woven an ever-tightening net around people across the country. These systems are multi-layered and overlapping. The government issues every citizen a national identification card that is essential to accessing many public and private services. This “real name registration” requirement enables authorities to collect and compile vast databases of personal profiles linked to an individual’s ID. At the same time, the government has been blanketing the country with closed-circuit surveillance cameras (CCTV).[22] Authorities have enlisted artificial intelligence technologies, provided by private companies—some with links to the state and the military—to help them automatically identify people from public surveillance footage streams and telephone calls; they are also using big data systems to identify individuals posing political threats.[23] All these systems are being developed and implemented without meaningful privacy protections against state surveillance. The depth, breath, and intrusiveness of the Chinese government’s mass surveillance on its citizens maybe unprecedented in modern history.[24]

These mass surveillance systems remain unchallenged in China because there are few meaningful checks on government powers. The Ministry of Public Security is accountable to no one except to the CCP—it is not required to report surveillance activities to any other government agency, or to publicly disclose this information. It is all but impossible for people to know what personal information the government collects, and how the government uses, shares, or stores their data.[25]

Mass Surveillance in Xinjiang

While mass surveillance systems in Xinjiang are based on the same basic designs described above, Xinjiang authorities seem to have gone the furthest in China in implementing them, contending that aggressive use of such systems is necessary for countering “the three [evil] forces”—separatism, terrorism, and extremism.[26] There have been a number of reported violent incidents in Xinjiang—notably the Urumqi market bombing in 2014—and the Chinese government has characterized these incidents as terrorism, blaming some of them on foreign groups.[27] The Chinese government claimed in a March 2019 White Paper on Xinjiang, that it had arrested nearly 13,000 terrorists in Xinjiang since 2014.[28] However, obtaining accurate accounts of violence in Xinjiang is extremely difficult because the government keeps tight control over this information. To what extent these incidents in Xinjiang are linked to foreign groups—as opposed to domestic incidents triggered by local or even interpersonal grievances—is also unclear.[29] Chinese laws also define terrorism and extremism in an overly broad and vague manner, such that a large range of activity relevant to ethnic and religious expression and custom are punishable and prohibited, such as wearing “abnormal” beards or veils in public places or naming babies with names that “exaggerate religious fervor.”[30]

Under the Strike Hard Campaign, Xinjiang authorities have collected biometrics, including DNA samples, fingerprints, iris scans, and blood types of all residents in the region between the ages of 12 and 65.[31] Additionally, authorities have required residents to give voice samples when they apply for passports.[32] All of this data is being entered into centralized, searchable databases.[33] The collection of these biometrics is part of the government’s drive to form a “multi-modal” biometric portrait of individuals and to gather ever more data about its citizens. All of this data can be linked in police databases to the person’s identification number, which in turn is linked to a person’s other biometric and personal information on file, such as the kind of data described in this report. The use of mass surveillance extends beyond Xinjiang and into the Turkic Muslim diaspora as authorities pressure them to provide detailed information about themselves, including their address, phone number, and school or workplace.[34]

Xinjiang can best be described as one of several clusters of mass surveillance industries in China, each catering to the local governments where they are based, with ideas cross-fertilizing between these clusters. One hallmark of Xinjiang’s mass surveillance infrastructure is “convenience police stations”—street-corner police stations that together form a dense network of control through the region—that were brought to Xinjiang when Party Secretary Chen Quanguo transferred to the region from Tibet.[35] Another basic building block of Xinjiang’s mass surveillance infrastructure is the “grid system” of dividing populations into geometric units for tighter surveillance and service provision, which first underwent trials in Beijing in 2004.[36]

While many of the companies that enable mass surveillance in Xinjiang are Chinese companies, foreign technology, companies, and investment also play a role in supporting the Xinjiang authorities’ abuses. US-based company Thermo Fisher Scientific supplied the Xinjiang police with some of the DNA sequencers at a time when those authorities were building large-scale infrastructure to process DNA samples of Xinjiang residents.[37] A Yale University geneticist collaborated—and shared DNA samples—with a Ministry of Public Security researcher in 2014. That collaboration enabled the ministry to identify Uyghurs’ ethnicity by examining their genetic materials.[38]

The Central IJOP System

The findings of this report are based on an examination of the IJOP app interface—rather than the central system itself, which remains largely a black box. The current findings enrich what Human Rights Watch previously knew about the system, though many questions remain.

Human Rights Watch’s previous research into the IJOP central system, which was based on government procurement documents, indicated that it gathers information from multiple sources or machine “sensors.”[39] One source is CCTV cameras, some of which have facial recognition or infrared capabilities (giving them “night vision”). Another source is “wifi sniffers,” which collect the unique identifying addresses of computers, smartphones, and other networked devices.[40] The IJOP system also receives information from some of the region’s countless checkpoints and from “visitors’ management systems” in access-controlled communities, such as residential areas and schools. In addition, these documents say some of these checkpoints “receive, in real time, predictive warnings pushed by the IJOP” so they can “identify targets … for checks and control.”[41] Our current research into the IJOP app suggests the IJOP system is pulling location information from these sensory systems to chart the movement or “trajectories” of people.

We also know—through reverse engineering the IJOP app and examining its source code—that the IJOP central system seems to draw on detailed information collected by the Xinjiang authorities about package delivery.[42] Presumably, there is a system tracking such information and feeding it to the IJOP system, which draws on some of that data in populating the app.

We know that there are at least two other apps that Xinjiang government officials use to gather personal data from residents: an app for Xinjiang officials when they conduct intrusive home visits (“新疆入户走访”[43]), and another app for collecting data on migrant workers (“基础工作小助手”[44]). While we have not had access to them, some local government reports state that the data collected via these other apps feed into the IJOP system.[45]

However, we do not know if—and how—the IJOP system is connected to other surveillance systems in China. For example, in the IJOP app screenshot tracking people who have “gone off-grid” (p. 38), the drop-down menu available for government officials includes an option to note that the person in question “has left Xinjiang.” Presumably, if the IJOP system is connected to its counterparts elsewhere in China, it would have “known” that, and thus there would be no need to flag or investigate that person.

While the IJOP central system—and much of Xinjiang’s mass surveillance systems—are managed by the Public Security Bureau, police officers are not the only Chinese government officials tasked with mass surveillance. Since 2014, Xinjiang authorities have sent 200,000 cadres from government agencies, state-owned enterprises, and public institutions to regularly visit and surveil people. Authorities call this initiative “fanghuiju” (访惠聚). In October 2016, authorities initiated a related effort, called the “Becoming Family” (结对认亲) campaign, which involves requiring officials to stay in Turkic Muslims’ homes regularly. There is no evidence to suggest that families can refuse such visits. During these intrusive home visits, the cadres perform several functions, including surveillance and inputting the data of families into apps such as the IJOP.

The IJOP system requires officials to respond to many perceived abnormalities in people’s lives, a grueling task for government officials. One official lamented that many colleagues have “worked so hard” to meet the IJOP’s appetite that “their eyes are so tired and reddened.”[49] These officials are under tremendous pressure to carry out the Strike Hard Campaign. Failure to fulfill its requirements can be dangerous, especially for cadres from ethnic minorities, because the Strike Hard Campaign also targets and detains officials thought to be disloyal.[50] It is unclear how long Xinjiang authorities can sustain this high volume of labor-intensive investigations, though presumably authorities may be able to collect some of the personal information in a more automated manner in the future.

Currently, much of the IJOP system appears to function as simple conditional statements—if a, then b (for example, if the person who drives the car is not the same as the person to whom the car is registered, then investigate this person)—and the app suggests the IJOP system may not be as sophisticated as authorities have publicly advertised.[51] To what extent the IJOP central system is currently using big data algorithms in analyzing the collected personal data is unclear.

The IJOP system is generating a massive dataset of personal information, and of police behavior and movements in Xinjiang. Yet it is not known how the authorities plan to use such data. In 2017, the state-owned company that built the IJOP, CETC, established a new big data national laboratory for “social security risk awareness, prevention, and control”[52] in Urumqi, together with the Xinjiang police “special investigative unit” and Ministry of Public Security big data researchers. The lab dispensed grants for the first time in July 2017 to 16 grantees; one of the co-chairs of the panel evaluating the grantees was the vice-chief of Xinjiang’s police.[53] An examination of the list of research topics suggests Chinese police are developing capabilities for “reality mining”[54] that go beyond existing forms of surveillance. By studying how people interact, using data gathered by machines such as their mobile phones or checkpoints—an approach considered more accurate than existing subjective sources for analyzing such interactions—the authorities seemingly hope to be able to understand in a more fine-grained way how people lead their lives: whom they talk to, where they go, and what they do. The goal is apparently to identify patterns of, and predict, the everyday life and resistance of its population, and, ultimately, to engineer and control reality.[55]

II. How the IJOP App Works: An Overview

Party Secretary Ding Jian explained the IJOP system in detail…. He randomly chose one of the households [in the village], and the technician immediately pulled out the…positioning coordinates as well as relevant information about the family…. [The party secretary] randomly chose a vehicle number and asked the operator to pull up the vehicle’s location.

—Village-based work team report, describing the village CCP secretary in Tekes County demonstrating to his superior how the IJOP system and app works, February 2018

The IJOP app is a multi-functional tool. Beyond its three broad, main functions[56]—data collection, filing of reports, and prompting “investigative missions” by police—the app has a range of other functions, including:

Communication function: The IJOP app relies on AcroPhone (AcroUC), a “unified communication system,” for officials to communicate across platforms (such as voice messages, emails, telephone calls).

Geolocation and map functions: The IJOP app logs the police officer’s GPS locations and other identifying information when they submit information to the IJOP app. The IJOP app uses a map functionality by Baidu, a major Chinese technology company, for purposes including planning the shortest route for police vehicle and officers on foot, according to the app’s source code.

Search function: The IJOP app allows officials to search for information about people using their name, ID number, household number used to access public utilities (户号), and building address (see Appendix III). In addition, officials can access, upon approval of their superiors, the “full profile” of a given individual.

Facial recognition function: The IJOP app we examined contains facial recognition functionality for checking whether a photo on an ID matches a person’s face or for cross-checking pictures on two different documents. It also contains code for facial recognition at log-in from Face++, a major Chinese company specializing in facial recognition products that it promotes for public security uses. However, Human Rights Watch has confirmed independently that this code is inoperable, and the company states it has no relationship to IJOP.

Wifi detecting: The IJOP app appears to collect data about wireless networks in range of the device. The collected data includes SSID (the service set identifier, or the name of a Wi-Fi network), encryption method, and GPS locations. Our technical investigation suggests that this possibly serves the purpose of creating a map of the existing wireless networks in the region, also known as “War Driving.”[59] This function could also potentially be used to identify and target weakly secured wireless networks and to join them for the purpose of surveillance and infiltration. It can also be used to understand the population density, connectivity, and the produced data volume of a given area. However, it is unclear how this functionality—or the data it gathers—is used.

Data Collection

The IJOP app prompts government officials to collect detailed personal data from people in Xinjiang.

Play Video

In screen 1, officials are prompted to choose the circumstances under which information is being collected by using a drop-down menu. The five choices are:

“during home visits,”

“on the streets,”

in “political education camps,”

“during registration for those who travel abroad,” and

“when collecting information from whose ‘hukou’ (or registered residency) is in Xinjiang but living in the mainland.”[60]

Although not shown on the screenshot, officials with “administrative rights”[61]—likely higher-level officials—are also presented with a sixth choice: “when collecting information from foreign nationals who have entered [Xinjiang].”

Officials are then prompted to log and submit to the IJOP central system a range of information about the person, from the person’s height, to their blood type, to their political affiliation.

There is a second main page that belongs to this set of data collection tasks, but we were unable to generate it when reverse-engineering the app. We examined the source code and found that this second page is prompting officials to collect even more information from people, including their religious and political status and activities abroad. This page also reveals that there are 36 “person types” to whom the authorities are paying special attention.

Click to expand Image © 2019 Human Rights Watch

On this page, the IJOP app requests different types of data depending on the type of situation in which information is being collected. For example, when officials are collecting information from people “on the street,” “in political education camps,” or “during registration for those who have gone abroad,” the app further prompts them to choose from a drop-down menu whether the person in question belongs to one of 36 types of problematic “person types.”

Filing Reports

The app allows officers to file reports about people, vehicles, objects, and events they find suspicious. Human Rights Watch was able to replicate most of the pages in this set of

tasks, and we have included some of them in Appendix IV. They are structured similarly to each other, in that they ask officers to log a written description of the suspicious person, vehicle, or event, log its location and identifying information (for example, license plate number, or ID card number), and add any relevant photos or audio recordings.

Investigative Missions

The most interesting—and revealing—part of the app is the group of tasks called “investigative missions” (调查任务). Mission instructions are sent directly via the IJOP central system to officers, requiring them to investigate certain individuals, vehicles, or events and provide feedback.

The IJOP app source code contains two simple mock examples. One states the person’s problem: Suspicious person Zhang San, whose address is Xinjiang Urumqi, ID number 653222198502043265, phone number 18965983265. That person has repeatedly appeared in inappropriate locations, and he displays [or his clothing shows] strong religiousness. Another contains a mock mission: Reporter name: Zhang Sanfeng Report text: Suspicious person Maimaiti Muhemuti, who originally lives in Xinjiang’s Urumqi, ID number 653222198502043215, phone number 13803021458. Report time: 2017-09-25 14:01:53 [Mission] text: Please carefully investigate whether he is still lives in Urumqi and investigate his family situation.

Screen 2

In screen 2, the official receives a description of the mission. The official can then view the details of the mission, conduct their investigation, and then fill out the feedback form. The missions can entail collecting extensive personal information from the individual.

In screen 3, officials are prompted to collect further identifying information about people’s vehicles by opening related screens with information about the vehicle, including color and type, as well as the license plate number and a picture of the vehicle. Entering such information presumably enables cameras equipped with artificial intelligence capabilities to recognize and keep track of the vehicle as it travels and passes through vehicle checkpoints.

Play Video

Officials are also prompted to log whether the people in question use a list of 51 “suspicious” internet tools, and if so, their account number.[62] Most of these tools are foreign messaging tools, such as Viber, WhatsApp, and Telegram, but also include Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).

Officials are also prompted, through related screens, to log individuals’:

Bank information (which bank they use and the bank account number),

Family members (name, ID number, relationship, phone number), and

“Suspiciousness,” and, if so, explain whether they require further investigation.

