"The recognition mechanism is not as strict as you think," the Bkav researchers write. "We just need a half face to create the mask. It was even simpler than we ourselves had thought."

Without more details on its process, however, plenty about Bkav's work remains unclear. The company didn't respond to the majority of a long list of questions from WIRED, saying that it plans to reveal more in a press conference later this week.

'I would say if this is all confirmed, it does mean Face ID is less secure than Touch ID.' Marc Rogers, Cloudflare

Most prominent among those questions, points out security researcher Marc Rogers, is how exactly the phone was registered and trained on its owner's real face. Bkav's staff could have potentially "weakened" the phone's digital model by training it on its owner's face while some features were obscured, Rogers suggests, essentially teaching the phone to recognize a face that looked more like their mask, rather than create a mask that truly looks like the owner's face.

"For the moment I can't rule out that these guys might be tricking us a bit," says Rogers, a researcher for security firm Cloudflare, who worked with WIRED on our initial attempts to crack Face ID, and was also one of the first to break Apple's Touch ID fingerprint reader in 2013.

But in response to questions from WIRED, Bkav denied any such trickery. A company spokesperson says that after crafting a mask that was able to fool Face ID---it first made four others that failed---the researchers re-registered their test iPhone X on the face of Bkav's staffer, to make sure that it hadn't biased the phone's model of his face. After that, they never entered a passcode into the phone, and yet the mask alone unlocked it.1

Bkav's history also lends its demonstration some credence. Nearly a decade ago, the company's researchers found that they could break the facial recognition of laptop makers including Lenovo, Toshiba, and Asus, with nothing more than two-dimensional images of a user's face. They presented those widely cited findings at the 2009 Black Hat security conference.

If Bkav's findings do check out, Rogers says that the most unexpected result of the company's research would be that even fixed, printed eyes are able to deceive Face ID. Apple patents had led Rogers to believe that Face ID looked for eye movement, he says. Without it, Face ID would be left vulnerable not only to simpler mask spoofs, but also attacks that could unlock an iPhone X even if the owner is sleeping, restrained, or potentially even dead.

The last of those situations is especially worrying, since it would theoretically be a problem for Face ID that even Touch ID didn't present, given that the latter checks for the conductivity of a living person's finger before unlocking. "That would mean this could be tricked without any liveness test at all," Rogers says. "I would say if this is all confirmed, it does mean Face ID is less secure than Touch ID." It's also unclear if Face ID uses any methods beyond eye movement to indicate that someone is alive. (At least one researcher points out that Touch ID make also work on a corpse: SR Labs' Ben Schlabs sent WIRED a video unlocking an iPhone SE with an altogether non-living foam-backed fake fingerprint.)2

Despite the potential threat of snooping on a sleeping, kidnapped, or dead person’s iPhone X, Rogers considers the notion that someone will make a silicone-and-plastic mask of the average person's face far-fetched. A far more practical concern is someone simply tricking a victim into glancing at their phone.. One by one, we tried each mask. One by one, the iPhone dismissed them without hesitation. In the worst cases, it failed to even acknowledge on the first try or two that a face was even present, not to mention the correct face.

Caragan used a needle to painstakingly punch hairs one by one into the silicone and gelatin masks. Here's one prior to trimming. Margaret Caragan/Pandora FX

As the sense of deflated hopes settled around the room, we tried some semi-desperate troubleshooting, like different angles, distance and lighting. Then we tried each mask on Pierce's own face rather than McMahon's, thinking that perhaps eye color did matter after all. No luck.

The most obvious flaw in our masks, we knew from the start, was the deep eyehole recesses. Caragan had warned of the problem: McMahon's eye placement may have matched Pierce's, but his nose was wider. That meant modeling Pierce's face over McMahon's required more thickness in the mask, so that the eyeholes were deep enough to cast McMahon's eyes into shadow. Which offers a tidy distillation of what makes Face ID so effective.

"The face of a person is a lot like a key. Just like the ridges of a key in a keyhole, each feature has to fit just so, or you have to accommodate them," Caragan says. "As long as things are smaller or fit the same, you can get the eyes right behind the mask. If not, they won’t line up."

We tried shining another iPhone's flashlight into McMahon's eyes and even the video team's studio lights, to better illuminate the masks' shadowed eye sockets for the iPhone's sensors. Caragan tried using mortician's wax to smooth over the border between the space between Pierce's eyes and the eyeholes of the thinnest, plastic mask. Nothing helped.

After nearly six hours of trial and error—mostly error—we gave up.

Not Over Yet

Despite our failed tests and the robustness of Face ID they seem to demonstrate, Rogers says he's still optimistic that he—or at least someone—will soon be able to spoof Apple's facial recognition. He bases that optimism in part on conversations he's had with Apple engineers, which he says give him reason to believe he'll succeed, though he declines to say more. "I’m still 90 percent sure we can fool this," Rogers says.

Even if a mask-making operation like ours eventually works, of course, face-casting would still be an absurdly impractical method of cracking an iPhone. Not even the most sophisticated spy can smear a bucket of silicone on your face without your knowledge and cooperation.

"All of these face masks are lovely for testing biometric attacks, but of course none of them are pragmatic," says Rogers. "No criminal on the street is going to make a complete scan of your face." Far more practical Face ID-based security threats are a thief or a government agent who simply makes you look at your own phone, or people with evil twins. (Or for that matter, application developers to whom Apple grants access to some—but not all—face data.)

But if a face-cast in the right material could break Face ID, the next evolution of the attack might be a carefully crafted digital model assembled from photos on Facebook or Instagram. Security researchers have already shown they can break some facial recognition systems with those easily-obtained social media pics, and other AI tools have shown how two-dimensional images can be converted into 3-D models.

'I’m still 90 percent sure we can fool this.' Marc Rogers, Cloudflare

After all, hacking techniques only get better over time. Rogers points to the history of Touch ID: The first attempts to crack Apple's fingerprint reader with an inanimate, finger-like object failed. But just days after its release, a researcher who goes by the name Starbug, a member of the German hacker group the Chaos Computer Club, showed that he could scan a fingerprint from a phone, etch it into polychlorinated biphenyl, then transfer it with graphite and wood glue to trick the phone's sensor. (Rogers would reveal his own technique, using dental alginate, just a few hours later.)

Flash forward to the end of 2014, and Starbug revealed that he could break into a politician or celebrity's iPhone with nothing but a photo that includes a clear view of their thumb. "Once we worked out what the flaw was and how to exploit it," says Rogers, "We refined it and refined it and refined it."

That means, with the iPhone X soon to be in the hands of thousands of hackers and curious researchers, no Face ID user should get too comfortable, Rogers says. He still has a few face-stealing ideas up his sleeve—and a friendly score to settle with Starbug and the German hackers who edged him out on the Touch ID hack.

"I’m not going to admit defeat. Especially not in front of the Germans," Rogers says. "It won’t be the end of the world if he beats me. But I’ll owe him a lot of beer if he does."

Reporting contributed by David Pierce, Junho Kim and Jordan McMahon.. The release of the iPhone X earlier this month included a new facial recognition security feature called Face ID. Designed to replace the iPhone’s Touch ID feature, Face ID uses face-based authentication via infrared screening to identify the user and provide access to the iPhone X as well as authorize purchases via Apple Pay. Banks are starting to utilize this feature as well.

Apple said Face ID uses 30,000 points of reference to map out a user’s face, making the likelihood that the feature could be fooled extremely low, but recently, a Vietnamese company called Bkav has circumvented this technology with a mask made from 3-D parts. This development spells out what may only be the beginning of a string of potential flaws surrounding this new feature. So should business users be worried?

“Apple’s facial recognition was never intended to be a security measure for strong authentication,” said Josh Mayfield, director of product marketing at FireMon. “Strong authentication cannot be faked, gamed, or manipulated. Apple’s facial recognition begins with the opening assumption that the user gazing at the screen is likely to be the correct user. From there, the recognition system only seeks to confirm its assumption…never to seek to prove its assumption wrong.”

SEE: Mobile device computing policy (Tech Pro Research)

Paul Norris, senior systems engineer at Tripwire, stated that hacks like the one Bkav carried out take a great deal of time and effort. “Detailed dimensions would have had to be taken to create the mask and the security firm alluded to the fact that they had to use a special material on the mask too,” he said. “What they didn’t disclose was how many attempts and what level of effort it took to get the mask to work flawlessly.” Norris also pointed out that certain security details built into Apple’s Face ID can mitigate risk. Five failed attempts to authenticate users via facial means will force the user to enter a passcode, which is required for Face ID to function. In addition, the passcode must be entered when the device:

Has just been turned on or restarted

Hasn’t been unlocked via Face ID in the last four hours

Hasn’t been unlocked via the passcode in the past six and a half days

Hasn’t been unlocked at all for more than 48 hours

Has received a remote lock command

Has initiated the Emergency SOS function

Terry Ray, CTO of cybersecurity firm Imperva, pointed out that Apple concedes that a user’s twin or other close family member could look similar enough to a user to trigger a false positive. Worse, researchers have been able to brute force facial authentication in the past.

SEE: Special report: Cybersecurity in an IoT and mobile world (free PDF) (TechRepublic)

Ray said that false negatives can happen too. If the owner of the phone undergoes a notable appearance change – such as shaving a beard or getting a drastically different haircut, then Face ID could fail to authenticate and the passcode will be required in order to set up Face ID again to match the user’s updated looks.

However, said Ray, “The average consumer is probably not at risk from a facial recognition attack or a false positive authorization, unless of course, they possess a devious identical twin,”

A hack like the one Bhav pulled off would cost about $150 in 3D supplies, which is not financially crippling to a potential attacker but also not something not likely to be invested in on a widescale basis. It would also require access to the phone itself, at which point some physical security would have already been compromised. Finally, the mask would have to be authentic enough to unlock the phone within five attempts inside a 48-hour time window.

“Is the value in one phone worth this effort?” said Ray. “Probably to someone with a particular agenda, but not likely an issue for most users.”

Ray said that a common question in the security realm is whether the technology being considered is good and easy enough for your purposes: “Nothing is perfect and the right technology is one you feel comfortable to use and one that keeps you acceptably secure.”

Also see:. iPhone X’s Face ID keeps getting tricked.

As pointed out by Forbes, researchers at the Vietnamese security firm Bkav have found another way to bypass Apple’s facial recognition system. The team, which pulled off a similar hack earlier this month, was able to replicate a face using a series of photos, stone powder, and 2D printed eyes. The researchers call the mask "the artificial twin."

"Bkav experts found out that stone powder can replace paper tape (used in previous mask) to trick Face ID' AI at higher scores," Bkav wrote in a blog post. "The eyes are printed infrared images—the same technology that Face ID itself uses to detect facial image. These materials and tools are casual for anyone. An iPhone X has its highest security options enabled, then has the owner's face enrolled to set up Face ID, then is immediately put in front of the mask, iPhone X is unlocked immediately. There is absolutely no learning of Face ID with the new mask in this experiment."

You might be thinking: How can anyone get a proper scan of my face without my knowledge? Bkav claims it’s easier than many of think. Researchers said all they have to do is set up a series of concealed cameras in a room.

"For example, if you are standing in the middle of booth, it will take photos of you at different angles in just two seconds. And we take an infrared image of your face," a Bkav spokesperson told Forbes. "Then, we will make 3D object of your face from the photos... Then, with the 3D object, we use a 3D printer, using stone powder as material, to print the twin mask of your face. It will be the original mask by the printer, no modification is needed." All in all it cost about $200 to make the mask.

You can check out the hack above.

Since the iPhone X was released, many people have discovered ways to fool the security feature. Twins and children have successfully unlocked phones using less elaborate methods than Bkav’s, which has made more and more users skeptical.

Though no security feature is 100 percent foolproof, the firm insists the Touch ID is a much safer option, as it’s more difficult to collect fingerprints than it is to take photos of someone’s face.. Apple FaceID Hacked

It only took a week:

On Friday, Vietnamese security firm Bkav released a blog post and video showing that—by all appearances—they’d cracked FaceID with a composite mask of 3-D-printed plastic, silicone, makeup, and simple paper cutouts, which in combination tricked an iPhone X into unlocking.

The article points out that the hack hasn’t been independently confirmed, but I have no doubt it’s true.

I don’t think this is cause for alarm, though. Authentication will always be a trade-off between security and convenience. FaceID is another biometric option, and a good one. I wouldn’t be less likely to use it because of this.

FAQ from the researchers.

Posted on November 15, 2017 at 6:54 AM • 46 Comments. It's one of the most wanted features in the iPhone X, but it seems that Face ID may not be as safe as Apple thinks.

Cyber-security researchers claim they have fooled the face recognition technology with a mask that costs just £114 ($150) to make.

The findings suggest that face recognition is not yet mature enough to guarantee security for computers and smartphones, according to the researchers.

Scroll down for video

Cyber-security researchers claim they have fooled the face recognition technology with a mask that costs just £114 ($150) to make

THE MASK The main frame of the face was created with a 3D printer, and the nose was created by an artist from silicone. The eyes were represented with 2D images, while the 'skin was also hand-made to trick Apple's AI', according to the researchers. Worryingly, the mask took just six days to complete, and cost £114 ($150), suggesting that the technique could be replicated by hackers. Advertisement

The mask was made just one week after the iPhone X officially went on sale, by researchers from Ha Noi-based Bkav.

The researchers set up the Face ID feature as normal with a human face, before creating a mask of that face using a 3D printer.

Mr Ngo Tuan Anh, Vice President of Cybersecurity at Bkav, said: 'The mask is crafted by combining 3D printing with makeup and 2D images, besides some special processing on the cheeks and around the face, where there are large skin areas, to fool AI of Face ID.'

The main frame of the face was created with a 3D printer, and the nose was created by an artist from silicone.

The main frame of the face was created with a 3D printer, and the nose was created by an artist from silicone

The eyes were represented with 2D images, while the 'skin was also hand-made to trick Apple's AI', according to the researchers.

Bkav has released a video showing the mask unlocking the iPhone X in seconds - although it does not reveal the making of the mask, or how many attempts it took to unlock the device.

It is also unclear whether the researchers disabled Apple's Attention Aware feature, which means the device can only be unlocked when your eyes are open.

Bkav has released a video showing the mask (pictured right) unlocking the iPhone X in seconds

CONCERNS OVER FACE ID Several people have raised concerns about Face ID. These include: - Concerns that thieves could quickly unlock your device after they've stolen it - Worries that Apple would store data collected from Face ID images - Concerns that the system could be unlocked with a picture of your face - Worries that Face ID could have a racial bias - Concerns that police could unlock your device without permission

Advertisement

The mask took just six days to complete, and cost £114 ($150), suggesting that the technique could be replicated by hackers.

The researchers said: 'Potential targets shall not be regular users, but billionaires, leaders of major corporations, nation leaders and agents like FBI need to understand the Face ID's issue.'

Apple could not provide comment, but pointed MailOnline to its information manual about Face ID security.

The researchers suggest that despite Apple's claims, face recognition is not yet secure enough.

They added: 'After nearly 10 years of development, face recognition is not mature enough to guarantee security for computers and smartphones.

'As for biometric security, fingerprint is the best.'. video

TikTok ban in place, but how long before it’s gone?

The countdown clock for TikTok in the U.S. continues to run, as the Senate passes a bill and President Biden signs it into law, giving the Chinese-owned company up to a year to sell to a new owner, or face a U.S. ban. Analyst Jack Gold joins the show as guest co-host this week to discuss this news, as well as the ‘earthquake effect’ of the FTC’s ban on non-compete agreements for workers, and whether an AI dogfighting demonstration by the U.S. Air Force is just a dog-and-pony show.. Apple no longer wants you to unlock your iPhone with touch. With the iPhone X, it’s all about your face.

Face ID was the standout feature of the iPhone X, and one that differentiates it from the iPhone 8 range and anything that’s come before. It’s Apple’s latest biometric authentication system and works using a new camera array on the front of the screen.

Apple claims the error rating on the iPhone X’s Face ID is one in a million. TouchID had a 1 in 50,000 chance of unlocking for the wrong fingerprint. The tech giant also said Face ID can tell the difference between twins (although the error rating drops when it comes to relatives) and doesn’t get ‘spooked’ by a photograph or even a mask of someone’s face.

READ NEXT: iPhone X review

The latter has now been called into question. After WIRED tried, and failed, to use a mask to trick the system, Vietnamese security firm Bkav claims to have mastered it using a (frankly terrifying) 3D-printed mask and a prosthetic nose. It said that creating the mask was simple, using simple 3D scanning software like that found on the Sony XZ1, and a silicone nose.

In a blog post, and accompanying video, the researchers explain: “We were able to trick Apple’s AI because we understood how their AI worked and how to bypass it. As in 2008, we were the first to show that face recognition was not an effective security measure for laptops…Apple has done this not so well.” In the video, the team is shown removing a cover from the mask positioned in front of the iPhone X. The handset then automatically unlocks.

Bkav was the first company to “break” facial recognition for laptops following its introduction on a range of Toshiba, Lenovo and Asus laptops. That particular exploit was publicly demonstrated and confirmed in 2008. The Face ID proof-of-concept hack has not yet been confirmed in this way so it should be taken with a pinch of salt.

When asked why Bkav has been successful where other websites and firms have failed, it vaguely said: “It is because…we are the leading cyber security firm 😉 It is because we understand how AI of Face ID works and how to bypass it.” It is not clear, therefore, how the initial face was registered on the phone and how the mask specifically differs from others.

Mark James, security specialist at ESET told Alphr: “Although the video itself does leave a few questions to be answered, we need to understand that any of the ‘extra’ ID features of this, and indeed any previous, iPhone have always been aimed at the average user. TouchID and Facial recognition are there for ease, not added security; both of these features can and have been duped by technology- the question you need to ask yourself is ‘does this feature make my life easier?’. If the answer is yes and your phone just contains the ‘normal’ run of the mill level of private stuff, then you’re good to go.”

Alphr has contacted Apple for comment.

Apple Face ID: What is Face ID?

On the iPhone X, Apple has removed the home button, and with it, Touch ID. In its place is Face ID powered by a so-called TrueDepth camera system built into the front of the phone where the earpiece currently sits on the iPhone 7 range.

READ NEXT: Apple drops the price of iPhone 7 following launch of iPhone 8

This camera system features a number of sensors designed to recognise a person’s face including a dot projector, infrared camera and flood illuminator (which is a fancy name for what is effectively a flash). Glancing at this system will allow you to automatically unlock your iPhone X, but can also be used for Apple Pay and to unlock compatible apps, including banking apps.

Apple Face ID: How does Face ID work?

See related Behold the faster, more powerful Apple iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus

When the camera array identifies a person’s face and gaze it projects 30,000 invisible infrared dots to effectively ‘map’ the shape and contours of the face. When a user’s face is first stored on the phone, the pattern of these dots is fed to the iPhone X’s A11 Bionic chip and its neural networks.

These neural networks, designed to work like a human brain, create a mathematical model of your face using the dot pattern and stores this model in a “secure enclave” on the iPhone X itself – it is not uploaded to a cloud server or similar.

READ NEXT: Apple unveils the iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus

Next time you look at your iPhone X, the same dots are mapped onto your face and compared to the stored mathematical model. If the pattern matches the model, the phone unlocks. This happens in less than a second. The more the TrueDepth system is used, the more in-tune it becomes to your face and, from the start, can identify face shapes regardless of changes to skin tone, hairstyles, whether you’re wearing glasses or a hat, for example.

The flood illuminator helps illuminate the face so the dots know where to be placed and means Face ID works in the dark.

Apple Face ID: Is Face ID secure?

Apple claims the error rating on the iPhone X’s Face ID is one in a million. TouchID had a 1 in 50,000 chance of unlocking for the wrong fingerprint.

The tech giant also said Face ID can tell the difference between twins (although the error rating drops when it comes to relatives) and doesn’t get ‘spooked’ by a photograph or even a mask of someone’s face.

Apple didn’t elaborate on how it does this, and may never do to protect its IP, but this is a direct nod towards the early failings of Samsung’s iris scanner technology and, more recently, the facial recognition on the Note 8 which were both “fooled” by hackers and photos, according to reports.

Furthermore, Face ID only unlocks when you look at it. In particular, it is what Apple calls ”attention aware”; it looks for a sign that shows you’re looking directly at the camera system and want it to unlock rather than just glancing at the phone for the time, for example. Notifications will also only expand when its owner looks at the phone.

During its first full demo at the iPhone 8 event, however, Face ID failed…

Images: Apple/Bkav. Apple's new Face ID unlock system on the iPhone X can reportedly be tricked with paper eyes and pizza toppings.

Yes, you read that correctly, but let us explain. Life-size eyes printed onto paper, then placed on the face of a 'sleeping' iPhone X owner, who had their phone nearby, were enough to bypass Face ID — at least according to a new video from FaceTec, a biometric security company pushing out its own facial recognition app, Zoom.

FaceTec conducted its short experiment, pushing the concept a step further, placing various pizza toppings on the iPhone owner's face. Black olives on top of slices of mushrooms (instead of the paper eyes) also appeared to unlock Face ID, and so did a pair of bottle caps, although that took multiple attempts.

The company says this works, even when an iPhone X setting called 'Require Attention for Face ID' is switched on. This extra level of security is designed to prevent the iPhone from unlocking when the owner is not looking at it.

Unlike Face ID and other facial recognition systems, Zoom is meant to map your face from one distance, then a second, closer distance. This requires users to hold the phone steady, then move it towards them and hold it steady again — zooming in, hence the name. ZoOm uses the front-facing camera of an iPhone or Android device to scan the owner's face, which is stored as an encrypted data file (a "facemap") in the devices secure zone, and used for future authentication.

GearBrain tried out Zoom, and while it works quickly and reliably, we found the offset location of the Google Pixel 2 XL's front camera made zooming in on our face tricky at first. That being said, the app was not phased by difficult lighting conditions, and we can see the appeal to financial companies looking to employ biometric security that claims to work on "five billion" smartphones worldwide — in other words, every device with a front camera.

The Zoom app seen here is only a demonstration of how the San Diego-based FaceTec's technology works, but the company says its unlocking system has been shipping to developers for several months now, and will appear in banking applications soon. Zoom integration is free for small businesses and nonprofits, but is charged on a per active user, per year basis for enterprise-level customers.



Zoom claims to be more secure than Face ID, by using just one camera FaceTec demo app via App Store

Naturally, FaceTec has said little about how its system works, but claiming to have one up on Face ID, Touch ID and other systems like Samsung's iris scanner is a bold move for a startup. Zoom is "the only mobile biometric that cannot be spoofed by photos or videos, making it far more secure than legacy biometrics, including fingerprint, 2D face recognition and even eye scans," the developers say.. When Apple first announced Face ID for the iPhone X, it claimed the new feature was significantly more secure than Touch ID and couldn’t be fooled by even the most realistic of masks. But it turns out that might not be the case.



Vietnamese cyber security firm Bkav claims to have already tricked Face ID using a custom-made a mask—but don’t return your iPhone X just yet. Before you freak out, here’s what the news actually means for your smartphone security.

How Bkav Beat Face ID

According to Bkav, all you need to make a mask that can trick Face ID is a scan of the person’s face and about $150 worth of materials.

The second part is easy. The mask was made using some sculpted silicon, printer plastic, makeup and paper cutouts. Key areas, like the eyes and mouth, were actually recreated with 2D photos pasted onto the 3D surface. The design was based on the discovery that Face ID only scans about half of your face and allegedly doesn’t require eye movements to work, making it surprisingly easy to fool.

The first part is a little more complicated, though. Bkav used a handheld scanner that took five minutes to work. So the only way to scans someone’s face is to be in the same room, with their participation (either by choice or forced).

Why You Shouldn’t Be Worried

The fact that someone would need to be in the same room with you means this Face ID hack isn’t much of a threat to most people. Bkav notes that world leaders and CEOs could be at risk from a targeted attack, but for the rest of us, it’s not worth worrying about.

Down the line, it’s possible you could get the same results by quickly scanning someone’s face with a smartphone camera or even using photographs. But again, you don’t need to worry about that at the moment.

We also still don’t know how legitimate Bkav’s claims really are. The company may have purposefully done a poor job setting up Face ID so it was easier to trick, which would discredit the results. Bkav declined to answer a list of questions from Wired, but said it would reveal more at a press conference this week, so we should learn more soon.

Until then, there’s no reason to stop using Face ID, unless you simply find it annoying to use.. Security researchers say they used a $150 mask to break the Face ID facial recognition system that locks Apple's new iPhone X. The work may be a significant, it may be little more than a stunt with few real-world consequences, or it could possibly be something in the middle. So far, it's impossible to know because the researchers have evaded key questions about how they went about breaking into the device.

The supposed hack was carried out by researchers from Vietnamese security firm Bkav, which in 2009 demonstrated a way to bypass face-based authentication in Toshiba and Lenovo laptops. On Friday, company researchers published a video showing them unlocking an iPhone X by presenting it with a custom-made mask instead of the live human face that Apple has repeatedly insisted is the only thing that can satisfy the requirements of the facial recognition system.

The researchers said they designed their mask using 2D and 3D printers and that an artist made the nose by hand using silicone materials. Other features of the mask used 2D images and "special processing on the cheeks and around the face, where there are large skin areas" in a successful attempt to defeat the artificial intelligence Face ID uses to distinguish real faces from images, videos, or masks.

"It is quite hard to make the 'correct' mask without certain knowledge of security," a Bkav representative wrote in an e-mail to Ars. "We were able to trick Apple's AI, as mentioned in the writing, because we understood how their AI worked and how to bypass it."

The truth is out there

The video and accompanying press release omitted key details that are needed for other researchers to assess if the results represent a true bypass of an authentication system Apple has spent years developing. One of the most important details is whether the mask successfully unlocked the iPhone immediately after it was set up to use the real human face for authentication or if the bypass succeeded only over a period of time following the face enrollment. The distinction is crucial. According to a white paper Apple published earlier this month, Face ID takes additional captures over time and uses them to augment enrolled Face ID data. If the researchers trained Face ID over time to work with the mask, they were giving themselves an advantage a real-world attacker wouldn't have.

Another important consideration is how the mask was made. Did, for instance, the artist or any of the researchers have to have access to the real face the mask was based on? Did the human target sit for measurements or the taking of a mold? Or, on the other hand, was the mask solely crafted using images or videos that could be taken without the target's knowledge or consent? Again, the answers are crucial because if the mask could only be created with the help of the target, the bypass doesn't represent a meaningful hack.

Throughout the weekend, Ars pressed Bkav representatives repeatedly to describe these and other details. As the following exchange demonstrates, the representatives deflected and at times outright evaded the questions:

Ars: Were you able to use the mask to unlock the iPhone immediately after freshly enrolling the real face? The reason I ask is that, according to Apple's whitepaper, Face ID will take additional captures over time and augment its enrolled Face ID data with the newly calculated mathematical representation. Can you describe precisely how you went about conducting this experiment? Bkav: It does not matter whether Apple Face ID “learns” new images of the face, since it will not affect the truth that Apple Face ID is not an effective security measure. However, we knew about this “learning,” thus, to give a more persuasive result, we applied the strict rule of "absolutely no passcode" when crafting the mask. Ars: Can you explain why your hack worked but the ones attempted by Wired magazine failed? Bkav: Because... we are the leading cyber security firm ;) It is quite hard to make the "correct" mask without certain knowledge of security. We were able to trick Apple's AI, as mentioned in the writing, because we understood how their AI worked and how to bypass it. As in 2008, we were the first to show that face recognition was not an effective security measure for laptops. Ars: Are the dimensions of a person's face needed? How would those be obtained without a target sitting for them? Bkav: The 1st point is, everything went much more easily than you expect. You can try it out with your own iPhone X, the phone shall recognize you even when you cover a half of your face. It means the recognition mechanism is not as strict as you think, Apple seems to rely too much on Face ID’s AI. We just need a half face to create the mask. It was even simpler than we ourselves had thought. Apple has done this not so well. I remember reading an article on Mashable, in which Apple told that iPhone X had been planned to be rolled out in 2018, but the company then decided to release it one year earlier. This shows that they haven’t carried out scientific and serious estimation before deciding to replace Touch ID with Face ID. The 2nd point is, in cyber security, we call it Proof of Concept, which is useful for both sides, the hackers and the users. The hackers, they can find out a simpler way to exploit users’ device based on such PoC. While with users, if they know about such possibility, they will not use the feature to keep themselves safe. Just like the KRACK attack, it is not easy to be successfully exploited but users are urged to update the patch ASAP, because the threats are real. With Face ID’s being beaten by our mask, FBI, CIA, country leaders, leaders of major corporations, ect. are the ones that need to know about the issue, because their devices are worth illegal unlock attempts. Exploitation is difficult for normal users, but simple for professional ones. Ars: What’s the approximate cost of the mask? Bkav: ~150 USD Ars: How long did it take to construct the mask, including the time to develop 3D models and other assets associated with its production? Bkav: We started working on it, including 3D models and other assets, right after receiving iPhone X on Nov 5. Ars: What technologies and techniques were employed to make the 3D model associated with the 3D-printed portions of the mask? Bkav: We used a popular 3D printer. Nose was made by a handmade artist. We use 2D printing for other parts (similar to how we tricked Face Recognition 9 years ago). The skin was also hand-made to trick Apple's AI. Ars: Who would be the target for this kind of attack? Bkav: Potential targets shall not be regular users, but billionaires, leaders of major corporations, nation leaders and agents like FBI need to understand the Face ID’s issue. Security units’ competitors, commercial rivals of corporations, and even nations might benefit from our PoC.

In a follow-up e-mail, I wrote:

Advertisement

Thanks so much for the response. A few more questions: -- It's still not clear precisely how you went about conducting this experiment. Were you able to use the mask to unlock the phone immediately after enrolling the real face? -- Please explain precisely what was needed to make the mask. Did you need physical access to the real face? Did you have to measure, touch, or otherwise interact with the real face? Were you able to create the mask simply by taking a picture or video of the face? How did the artist create the nose? Did the artist touch the real nose, take a mold of the real nose, or otherwise interact with it in any way? -- Using your technique, what would a real-world attacker have to do to go about creating a mask that unlocked the phone of a billionaire, corporate leader, nation leader or FBI agent? Would the attacker have to have access to the target's actual face, or would a video or picture of the face be enough? Please be as specific as possible, and please don't discuss additional matters or opinions until directly answering these questions. Thanks again for your help.

A few hours later, I sent another e-mail that read:

Now that I've thought about things a bit more, here are a few more questions: -- What printers did you use, particularly for the 2D prints? -- What kind of material did you use as skin? Did you use real skin? -- The video and writing make no mention of the enrollment and how quickly it preceded the mask bypass. Is there a reason these details aren't covered? A few comments if I may. I respectfully disagree when you say it doesn't matter whether Apple Face ID learns new images of the face. It most definitely matters under which conditions new faces are learned. If a passcode is used by the attacker with the mask, it's not a valid hack. Furthermore, even without using the passcode, the mask might only be recognized after a large number of attempts that would have triggered the lockout after 5 failed tries but then storing the mask into the templates resulting in a first-try success. I think security people are likely to be skeptical of this hack without explicit documentation of these details.

The representative responded with the following:

Your questions are very good ones, we like them very much :) Let me update that there’s a QA part newly added to the following post http://www.bkav.com/FaceID. The QA comprises questions from different journalists (including you) that we continually gather and give answers to, so that those who are still doubtful can find out something they need. About 3D scanning and printing, it is now simple, will be even more simple in the future. We might use smartphones with 3D scanning capabilities (like Sony XZ1); or set up a room with a 3D scanner, a few seconds is enough for the scanning (here’s an example of a 3D scanning booth). An easier way is photograph-based, artists craft a thing from its photos. Take the nose of our mask for example, its creation is not complicated at all. We had an artist make it by silicone first. Then, when we found that the nose did not perfectly meet our demand, we fixed it by our own, then the hack worked. That’s why there’s a part on the nose's left side that is of a different color (photo attached). So, it’s easy to make the mask and beat Face ID. Here, I want to repeat that our experiment is a kind of Proof of Concept, the purpose of which is to prove a principle, other issues will be researched later. Additionally, because many journalists want to know more about our experiment, an international press conference is planned to be held and live streamed early next week. During the conference, any of your further questions and the ones that are left unclarified in this email will be answered clearly and satisfactorily. Detailed time and duration will be available soon. For the time being, I hope that the QA and above information can be useful to some extent.

One way of reading the responses suggests that the researchers and artist required the help of the target to create the mask, but in the future, the researchers think it will be possible to design similar masks that will instead require only the aid of 3D scans or photographs that could be taken without the target's knowledge or consent. If this interpretation is correct, the bypass is still interesting because it undermines Apple's contention that only a live face can be used to unlock a Face-ID enabled phone. But a hack that requires the help of the target would nonetheless suggest that for the time being, Face ID remains relatively secure.

Advertisement

Bkav researchers should publish a longer video that documents what was required to make the mask and whether it's able to fool Face ID immediately after a real face has been enrolled. Until then, it's impossible to say if this is a real hack.. Vietnamese hackers who previously said they could bypass Apple’s Face ID biometric phone security with a mask claim to have hacked the iPhone X again, this time with more evidence of their success.

According to news from Forbes, Vietnamese cybersecurity company Bkav posted a video that shows how a researcher was able to reset the facial recognition enrollment, enroll his own face and then unlock the iPhone X seconds later. The researcher used a mask made of a 3D printed visage and 2D printed eyes — which cost less than $150. The researchers called their mask the artificial twin, since it was similar to the mask it used when it first hacked Face ID.

“About two weeks ago, we recommended that only very important people, such as national leaders, large corporation leaders, billionaires, etc., should be cautious when using Face ID,” said Bkav VP of Cybersecurity Ngo Tuan Anh in the report. “However, with this research result, we have to raise the severity level to every casual [user]: Face ID is not secure enough to be used in business transactions.”

A spokesperson for Bkav told Forbes it has decided not to alert Apple to the new way it was able to fool Face ID, since the company hasn’t responded to media reports about the security of the facial recognition biometrics technology on the iPhone X following the initial hack.

While Bkav was able to use a mask to unlock a user’s iPhone X, the cybersecurity firm didn’t address if a mask-based attack could happen in the real world. After all, the bad guys would need an accurate scan of the target’s face and then would have to spend the time and effort to create the mask. They would also have to make sure the mask is aligned with the phone at a specific angle in order for the hack to work.

“What the experiment does show is that a static mask can fool the Apple technology that is supposed to ensure that only a living face is recognized. Once that is possible, it then becomes theoretically possible to produce a static mask to open the device,” security and encryption expert Professor Alan Woodward from the University of Surrey in the U.K said in the report.. “It is quite hard to make the "correct" mask without certain knowledge of security,” a Bkav blog post states. “We were able to trick Apple's AI, because we understood how their AI worked and how to bypass it.”. Did Apple's vaunted Face ID facial recognition system on the iPhone X already get hoodwinked?

That's what a Vietnamese security company says it did -- using only a $150 3D-printed mask. BKAV uploaded a video demonstration as a proof of concept on Friday, showing an iPhone X unlocking after exposing it to a customized mask, which only had cutouts of eyes, a silicon nose and a mouth on a 3D-printed frame.

Ngo Tuan Anh, BKAV's vice president of cybersecurity, then unlocked the Face ID using his own face, to show that it worked on his too. You can see it here.

Face ID is one of the signature features on Apple's flagship iPhone X. While facial recognition isn't new, Apple says it's created the most secure version yet.

Skeptics were quick to predict that someone would be able to fool Face ID after it was unveiled in September. Facial recognition has shown its pitfalls before, with hackers tricking security by putting a photo in front of the camera. Apple points out that it uses infrared sensors and mapping dots to scan for 3D images. The company even went as far as working with Hollywood mask makers to train the biometric against falling for props.

BKAV, which built a reputation on fooling facial recognition, quickly touted toppling Face ID, writing that Apple didn't have enough "scientific and serious estimation before deciding to replace Touch ID with Face ID."

Apple declined to comment, referring to its Face ID security report for details. In the security guide, last updated this month, Apple wrote that Face ID had "an additional neural network that's trained to spot and resist spoofing," including from masks like BKAV's.

Watch this: Hackers claim to trick iPhone X Face ID with mask 01:40

But there are a few issues with the methods behind the video, none of which BKAV's blog post quite answered. Typically, with a major security flaw, researchers will publish a technical paper revealing how they found it, and who is vulnerable, showing the methodology behind the discovery.

BKAV, which is also trying to break into the phone business, hasn't provided those details, but said it would answer questions in a press conference this week. BKAV didn't respond to a request for comment, but here are our questions.

What's registered on BKAV's iPhone X's Face ID?

A mask could easily unlock an iPhone X if it's the "face" that's actually registered with Face ID.

BKAV failed to walk viewers through its research process, and this is a glaring hole in its transparency. You can register Face ID on anything with a face, including the mask.

Because Face ID runs on artificial intelligence that learns each time it's used, the algorithm could have been trained to learn the human's face based off the mask in reverse.

How often did they try to use Face ID and fail?

Like the previous question, this one is important to note based on how Face ID's algorithm learns. If your Face ID scan fails five times, you're forced to enter a passcode.

Each time you enter a passcode, Face ID learns the new scan and registers it as a positive entry.

"If Face ID fails to recognize you, but the match quality is higher than a certain threshold and you immediately follow the failure by entering your passcode, Face ID takes another capture and augments its enrolled Face ID data," Apple said in its white paper.

It's entirely possible that the masks could have failed more than five times, and after the researchers entered the passcode, it registered the mask as a positive scan to work in the future.

But BKAV said that it "applied the strict rule of 'absolutely no passcode' when crafting the mask," which would mean that the mask fooled Face ID in less than five attempts. The company never specified how many attempts it made.

How long did it take to make the mask?

The "no passcode" rule makes this task particularly tough.

Face ID has to be used about every four hours, or else it'll prompt the person to enter a password. The facial recognition is also disabled if the iPhone X hasn't been unlocked for more than two days.

BKAV said in its Q&A that it started working on the mask, including 3D models and the silicon nose, after it received the iPhone X on Nov. 5.

That would give them a 48-hour window from the moment they turned the device on to create a mask that worked. They did not specify how long it took to create the spoof.

The mask would also have to trick Face ID within the first four hours after registering the human face. It's not impossible, but that's an impressive number of hurdles to jump in a short amount of time without using a password, as BKAV said.

How practical is this?

When Face ID was first announced, there was a lot of discussion about how secure the facial recognition was. A major consideration was a person's threat model: looking at what risks that you as an individual encounter.

If your threats are a pickpocket at a bar, it's highly unlikely the thief will also have your facial structure and a scan of your face ready to 3D-print and unlock your phone with. BKAV said the potential targets wouldn't be people with average threat models, it would be "billionaires, leaders of major corporations, nation leaders."

Again though, the discovery prompts the question, even for billionaires and politicians: How likely is it someone will lose their iPhone X to a thief who also has a scale model of their face printed, with an accurate printout of their eyes, nose and mouth, and get it done in 48 hours?

"This seems like an unlikely sequence of events," said Paul Norris, a systems engineer at security company Tripwire.

BKAV said it used a detailed scan to develop the mask, which took about five minutes to finish. It also used a professional artist to create the nose, which failed at first, and "hand-made" the skin.

These requirements to create the mask reach such a high standard that it seems like it would be almost impossible to replicate this scenario in an actual attack.

The Smartest Stuff: Innovators are thinking up new ways to make you, and the things around you, smarter.

CNET Magazine: Check out a sample of the stories in CNET's newsstand edition.. . Apple claims the facial recognition system on the new iPhone X is impervious to being fooled by photos, impersonators and masks, but a team of hackers claim to have beaten the technology after just a week.

Cyber security firm Bkav says a 3D-printed mask costing just $150 (£115) to make has fooled the Face ID software, which is used to unlock the iPhone X, authorise payments and log in to apps.

The researchers said it proved that Face ID is "not an effective security measure", although making the mask did require a detailed facial scan, and would be difficult for normal users to replicate.

However, the researchers' demonstration has not been independently verified, and the video does not go through the entire set-up process, so there are likely to be doubts about the supposed flaw.

When the iPhone X was unveiled in September, Apple touted the security benefits of Face ID, saying there is a one in a million chance of another person being able to unlock it, and that it had stress-tested the technology using silicone masks made by Hollywood studios.

Bkav constructed the mask using a combination of 3D printing, a silicone nose and printed images of the eyes. A video released by the company appears to show Face ID being fooled when a cloth covering the mask is removed, although it does not show Face ID being set up, so it cannot be confirmed that the technique works.. Https%3a%2f%2fblueprint api production.s3.amazonaws.com%2fuploads%2fvideo uploaders%2fdistribution thumb%2fimage%2f82967%2f7e1f7535 a028 4885 9984 973f49d6cd0c

There is no such thing as foolproof phone security.

Case in point: Security researchers at Bkav have reportedly defeated the iPhone X's Face ID feature using a simply-constructed 3D mask.

The average person probably doesn't need to worry about the purported hack, but billionaires, celebrities, and high-profile public figures like presidents may want to rethink their use of Apple's nascent facial recognition technology.

SEE ALSO: If you own an iPhone X, you absolutely need to know this gesture trick

Apple is trying to convince people Face ID is more secure than its Touch ID fingerprint sensor, which is still used in the iPhone 8 in addition to earlier models. But stories about weak spots (especially if you've got a twin or you're a kid) keep popping up.

While Apple acknowledges that Face ID isn't hack-proof, the company says it's built the face recognition technology to have 1 in a million chance of somebody else unlocking your iPhone X compared to the 1 in 50,000 chance using Touch ID.

Not only that, but Apple says it worked with Hollywood makeup artists and mask makers to ensure that elaborate masks couldn't be used to bypass a person's iPhone X.

Before Bkav, a security firm, released its results, others have tried to trick Face ID using detailed masks and failed. The Wall Street Journal's Joanna Stern had a mold of her face made by a professional prosthetic company and, sure enough, her iPhone X wouldn't unlock when a colleague donned her fake face. Wired's David Pierce also attempted a much more detailed recreation of his face using a variety of different materials, but also failed to trick Face ID.

Bkav's rudimentary mask, though, tripped up the feature. The mask, which you can see below, included a 3D-printed face with 2D-printed eyes and lips and a 3D nose constructed of silicone. Mashable has reached out to Apple for comment on the hack.

If this hack looks basic, that's because it is — at least on the surface. Bkav says the crude mask only cost about $150 to make.

Rich and famous more at risk

That may sound really scary, but this hack won't affect most people.

For starters, the lengths one must go through — it took about a week for Bkav to create a mask that successfully tricked the iPhone X — isn't worth it in most cases.

Then there's the matter of getting scans of your eyes and mouth. According to Wired, Bkav's researchers need to manually scan a person's face for five minutes before getting enough detail to reconstruct a false mask.

Additionally, the silicon nose needs to be made by hand. An initial version of the nose reportedly didn't work and needed to be modified to deceive the iPhone X's TrueDepth cameras and built-in AI.

Though similar facial recognition unlocking technology on Samsung's Galaxy S8 and Note 8 phones is much easier to bypass (in some cases, it can be fooled by a picture), the alternative and more secure iris scanner built into these phones is much more difficult to hack, requiring very specific printers and contact lenses.

All things considered, Bkav's researchers say billionaires, celebrities and public figures, who will have their faces photographed and widely published could be easier targets for its hacks. With enough effort, a skilled craftsman could reconstruct a mask similar to the one Bkav made using lots of photographs.

"Potential targets shall not be regular users, but billionaires, leaders of major corporations, nation leaders and agents like FBI need to understand the Face ID's issue," the researchers said in a statement. "Security units' competitors, commercial rivals of corporations, and even nations might benefit from our PoC [proof of concept]."

Set up a strong passcode

Bkav still has some further explaining to do to convince other security experts that the hack is genuine, but given their track record — in 2008, they were the first ones to bypass face biometrics that shipped on top-brand laptops from the likes of Lenovo, Toshiba, Asus, and more — it appears sound.

Still, the researchers say Face ID is weaker than Apple claims:

I tried covering half my face (both sides), and then only my eyes, only my mouth, and then placed my hand spread open on my face, and I couldn't get Face ID to unlock on my own iPhone X. That's how it should work.

Face ID, like the face recognition technology on other phones, requires a person's eyes to be open in order to work. So if someone points your iPhone X at your face while you're sleeping it won't unlock.

However, while requiring your eyes to be open is one way to check against fakes, it's not a way to verify the face it's looking at is really alive. One way Apple could make Face ID just a smidgen more secure is to require a blink during the face detection process. Android introduced this blink check on Android 4.0 in 2011 after hackers cracked its face unlock feature.

Biometric security in our smartphones has improved significantly over the last few years. Though this Face ID hack looks terrifying, it's just as complex and time-consuming as recreating a mold of your fingerprint to fool Touch ID.

Unless you're holding the codes to nuclear codes (in which case you probably wouldn't even be allowed to use this tech) or have something in your device that's totally worth stealing, the amount of work required for this hack isn't going to produce a valuable return for hackers.

In any case, should you elect to not use Face ID as your main method of security for your iPhone X, make sure you have a really strong 6-digit or alphanumeric passcode in place (never just use four digits). Hackers could always try to brute force their way into your phone using software, but barring that, they can't obtain a code that's stored in the only impenetrable place in the world: your mind.

Https%3a%2f%2fblueprint api production.s3.amazonaws.com%2fuploads%2fvideo uploaders%2fdistribution thumb%2fimage%2f82720%2f1311c945 89d0 44f4 852a 38dc31caa160. . A researcher in Vietnam has demonstrated how he apparently fooled Apple‘s face recognition ID software on its new iPhone X using a mask made with a 3D printer, silicone, and paper tape.

An announcement on Friday by Bkav, a Vietnamese cybersecurity firm, that it had cracked Apple’s Face ID, and a subsequent video apparently showing an iPhone being unlocked when pointed at a mask, were greeted with some skepticism.

Ngo Tuan Anh, Bkav’s vice president, gave Reuters several demonstrations, first unlocking the phone with his face and then by using the mask. It appeared to work each time.

However, he declined to register a user ID and the mask on the phone from scratch because, he said, the iPhone and mask need to be placed at very specific angles, and the mask to be refined, a process he said could take up to nine hours.

Apple declined to comment, referring journalists to a page on its website that explains how Face ID works.

That page says the probability of a random person unlocking another user’s phone with their face was approximately one-in-a-million, compared to 1-in-50,000 for the previously used fingerprint scanner. It also says Face ID allows only five unsuccessful match attempts before a passcode is required.

Anh acknowledged that preparing the mask wasn’t easy, but he said he believed the demonstration showed facial recognition as a way to authenticate users would be risky for some.

“It’s not easy for normal people to do what we do here, but it’s a concern for people in the security sector and important people like politicians or heads of corporations,” he said. “(These) important people should absolutely not lend their iPhone X to anyone if they have activated the Face ID function.”

It’s the first reported case of researchers apparently being able to fool the Face ID software.

Cybersecurity experts said the issue was not so much whether Face ID could be hacked, but how much effort a hack required.

“Nothing is 100% secure,” wrote Terry Ray, chief technology officer at U.S.-based cybersecurity company Imperva, in a note. “Where there’s a will, there’s a way. The questions are: How much trouble would someone go to, and how much would they spend, to get your data?”

Bkav’s Anh said the research took about a week, and included numerous failures. The mask frame was made of plastic, covered with paper tape to resemble skin, with a silicone nose and paper for eyes and mouth.

As far back as 2009, Bkav researchers highlighted what they said were problems with using facial recognition as a way to authenticate users. They said then that they had hacked three laptop manufacturers which used webcams to authenticate users.. . Hackers may have already proven that Face ID isn’t quite as secure as secure as Apple claims.

Using a simple 3D printed mask, Vietnamese security firm Bkav, has posted a video showing an iPhone X being unlocked after unveiling a composite 3D-printed mask made of plastic, makeup, silicone and paper cutouts for some facial features.

Bkav detailed how it hacked Face ID in a blog post but has not publicly demonstrated the process yet. It also hasn’t been confirmed by a third-party yet. Normal iPhone X users shouldn’t really be alarmed either because for now it requires a lot of time to 3D scan your face. Still, Bkav says it shows Face ID is less secure than Touch ID.

“Apple has done this not so well,” wrote Bkav. “Face ID can be fooled by mask, which means it is not an effective security measure.”

Fooling Face ID

The mask used by the hackers consisted of a 3D-printed frame of the victim’s face. They then attached a sculpted silicone nose, two-dimensional eyes and lips printed on papers. It’s a much simpler solution than the Hollywood-quality masks commissioned by WIRED that had much more detailed hair and facial features that failed to trick Face ID.

“The recognition mechanism is not as strict as you think,” wrote Bkav. “We just need a half face to create the mask. It was even simpler than we ourselves had thought.”

Even though Bkav claims to have beat Face ID, there’s still a lot of questions on how legitimate the hack is. It’s still unclear how the phone was registered and trained on the owner’s real face. To pull off the hack you need access to 3D scan the person’s face for 5 minutes.

Bkav said it made four masks that failed to unlock Face ID and then got it right on the fifth attempt. Billionaires and top CEOS could be potential targets of the hack, but most iPhone X owners have nothing to worry about.. . Face ID, Apple's facial identity sensor for iPhone X, is new and that's both scary and ripe for exploitation. We saw it happen with Touch ID, from all the concern that manifested when Apple announced it alongside iPhone 5s to the sensationalized headlines and the attempts to spoof it after it launched. Now, we're seeing the same thing with Face ID — fear, uncertainty, and doubt spread before it was even released and spoof attempts are following in a post-video-first, think-through-the-logic-flow second frenzy.

It's a shame. Face ID is incredibly enabling and accessible technology that can all but eliminate active authentication for users and allow them to unlock and use their iPhones more simply and easily than ever before. But those same people, the ones who could benefit the most, are being assaulted by an endless stream of headlines that are, bluntly, worse attacks than many of the so-called exploits they claim to be reporting.

I know this because every time one of those headlines goes live, I get calls and messages from my family members who are suddenly panicked by them. And they don't deserve that. Nobody does.

Face ID facts

Before Face ID was released alongside iPhone X, Apple published a white paper covering its implementation and current limitations. The company followed up with a support article.

I summed them all up, and some logical extensions, in my iPhone X review:

Face ID, as currently implemented, does not work in landscape orientation. (The camera system is optimized for portrait.)

Face ID needs to be able to see your eyes, nose, and mouth to be able to function. If too much of that area is blocked by IR filters (like some sunglasses) or other objects (like masks), there's not enough of your face to ID. (This is like the gloved finger with Touch ID.)

Direct sunlight on the Face ID camera can blind it, just like any camera. If you're standing with the sun directly over your shoulder, turn a bit before using Face ID. (This is like the moist finger with Touch ID.)

If you're under the age of 13, your facial features may not yet be distinct enough for Face ID to function properly and you'll have to revert to passcode.

Face ID can't effectively distinguish between identical twins (or triplets, etc.) If you have an identical sibling or even similar looking family member, and you want to keep them out of your iPhone X, you'll have to revert to passcode.

If you give someone else your passcode, they can either delete and re-setup themselves on Face ID or, if they look similar to you, enter the passcode repeatedly at failure to retrain Face ID to recognize their features as well/instead.

Unlike Touch ID, which allows for the registration of up to 5 fingers, Face ID currently only allows for one face. That means no sharing easy access with family members, friends, or colleagues.

If, for any reason, you don't like the idea of your face being scanned, you'll have to revert to passcode or stick with a Touch ID device.

There doesn't seem to be anything shown off in video or breathless headline since that doesn't fall under any of these limitations.

Hack vs. spoof

One of the most egregious errors in reporting that's gone on around Face ID also echoes those we saw years ago with Touch ID: The conflation of hacking with spoofing.

Master your iPhone in minutes iMore offers spot-on advice and guidance from our team of experts, with decades of Apple device experience to lean on. Learn more with iMore! Contact me with news and offers from other Future brands Receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors

Diagram of TrueDepth Camera (Image credit: Apple)

When people hear or read the word "hack", it's easy to imagine someone got into the system. In this case, the secure enclave on Apple's A11 Bionic chipset that houses the neural networks for Face ID and its data.

That absolutely has not happened. For both Face ID and Touch ID, the secure enclave remains inviolate. (That's very different from early HTC and Samsung implementations, which stored fingerprint data in world-readable directories...)

What we have seen is people try to spoof it or fool it into thinking its capturing legitimate biometric data. We saw this with Touch ID as well. We saw fingerprints being lifted and reproduced for the express purpose of fooling the sensor system. Even before biometrics, we saw this with traditional keys. People would scan and reproduce keys to get into door locks. It's exactly the type of attack you try against physical security systems.

Now we're seeing the same thing with family members, masks, and. Face ID.

Family Face ID feuds

Earlier this month, we saw two brothers post a video claiming one could unlock the Face ID system of the other. I covered it at the time:

One of the videos that got a lot of attention this weekend was made by two brothers, both of whom were eventually able to get Face ID to unlock the same iPhone X. It was revealed in a follow-up video that the first brother set up Face ID, then the second brother then tried to use it and was properly locked out. Then the second brother entered the iPhone X passcode to unlock.If someone else, including your sibling, has your iPhone X passcode, Face ID doesn't even exist. You've given them much higher access than even Face ID allows — including the ability to reset Face ID and other data on your iPhone X — and, literally, nothing else matters at that point. Keys to the castle. Time to go home.

But for Face ID in particular, there's some interesting behavior that's worth being reminded about: The neural networks that power Face ID are designed to learn and continue to match your face as you change your appearance over time. If you shave your mustache and/or beard, if you change your glasses and/or hairstyle, if you add or remove any makeup and/or facial decorations, as you put on or take off hats and/or scarves.

In the video, the second brother wasn't fooling or tricking Face ID in any way. By entering the Passcode was training it, as designed, to learn his face. By entering the Passcode multiple times, the second brother was literally telling Face ID to add his facial data to the first brother's.

More recently, we've seen younger siblings or children unlock the Face ID systems of older siblings or parents. In those cases, Passcode could also be used to train Face ID so it thinks the similar face is a new state of the registered face. In other words, it's introducing fuzziness into the system.

Even in cases where Passcode isn't being used to train a similar face, they're running into two of Apple's previously disclosed limitations:

If you're under the age of 13, your facial features may not yet be distinct enough for Face ID to function properly and you'll have to revert to passcode.

Face ID can't effectively distinguish between identical twins (or triplets, etc.) If you have an identical sibling or even similar looking family member, and you want to keep them out of your iPhone X, you'll have to revert to passcode.

If the facial geometry is the same and the relative is young enough that that they lack distinct facial features of their own, the chance for spoofing increases.

Mask confusion

Most recently, a Vietnamese security firm was given headlines when it claimed Face ID was successfully spoofed by dummy face. Similar to how the two brothers initially showed what looked like an immediate unlock but was subsequently disclosed as Passcode-enabled training, there turned out to be more to the mask-attack than the video first showed.

From Reuters:

Ngo Tuan Anh, Bkav's vice president, gave Reuters several demonstrations, first unlocking the phone with his face and then by using the mask. It appeared to work each time.However, he declined to register a user ID and the mask on the phone from scratch because, he said, the iPhone and mask need to be placed at very specific angles, and the mask to be refined, a process he said could take up to nine hours.

Machine Learning learns

People can shoulder-surf you (spy by looking over your shoulder) to learn your passcode. If you fall asleep they could put your finger on Touch ID. If they're a close family member or twin, they may be able to fool Face ID.

Face ID setup (Image credit: iMore)

Those first two attacks are against static targets. Passcode never gets harder to spy. Touch ID is a simple data comparison. Face ID, on the other, hand learns.

Right now that learning is being tested and, in some cases, it's letting in look-almost-alikes that it should keep out. But Apple designed not only the current neural networks to adapt over time, Apple designed them to be replaceable with better neural networks over time.

From my Face ID Explainer:

Face ID keeps the original enrollment images of your face (but crops them as tightly as possible so as not to store background information). The reason for this is convenience. Apple wants to be able to update the neural network trained for Face ID without you having to re-register your face. This way, if and when the neural networks are updated, the system will automatically retrain them using the images stored in the same region of the secure enclave.

With Face ID, we don't have to wait for new hardware for it to improve. Apple can and undoubtely will improve any and every time the neural networks get updated.

Choose your own unlocks

With similar-looking relatives, concerns over false positives and unintended or unwanted access are absolutely legitimate. It can be mitigated by switching to a passcode, but Face ID is so convenient many will want to use it anyway. In those cases, it's important to remember that Face ID isn't binary. You can turn it on or off but you can also choose what Face ID can unlock even when it's on.

You can individually enable or disable Face ID for:

iPhone unlock

Apple Pay

iTunes and App Store

Safari AutoFill

Other Apps (on an app-by-app basis)

So, if you're worried about your sibling or child unlocking your iPhone, you can turn off Face ID for that but leave it on for everything once you unlock your iPhone with Passcode. You could also leave Face ID for unlock, but turn it off for purchases if you're worried about those.

Yes, all of those introduce inconveniences, but they let you pick your own inconveniences. And if any of them are a real deal breaker, Apple also offers iPhone 8 with Touch ID, and Passcode and Password options for every iPhone.

Face to Face ID

When you tap a password manager or banking app and you watch it unlock, or you go to a website and your login suddenly fills before your eyes, it makes you forget passwords and passcodes exist. Convenience, though, is perpetually at war with security.

Face ID, like Touch ID and all biometrics, is about convenience. and identity. If you're truly concerned with security, you'll want to use a long, strong, unique password. But that's not tenable for most people. So that convenience and identity becomes vitally important.

And despite all the FUD and frantic headlines, Face ID delivers that. And, in most cases, in a far better, more transparent way than any authentication system before it.

So, by all means be informed. Read and watch everything you can. But don't let anyone scare you just so they can get views or make headlines. Try it out and decide for yourself.. IT'S barely been available for ten days, but conniving hackers have already cracked the iPhone X's facial recognition security system.

Security experts based in Singapore used a 3D scanner to re-create the owners face at a cost of £115.

4 The researcher places the phone in front of the mask and it unlocks Credit: YouTube/Bkav

They used 3D printing, makeup and 2D images plus some "special processing on the cheeks and around the face" to fool the iPhone X.

In a clip posted to YouTube, a researcher at Bkav can be seen holding his iPhone X in front of the model of his face and successfully unlocking it.

Apple has claimed that its Face ID - which replaces fingerprint scanner Touch ID from its earlier models - is super secure.

Samsung was left red-faced when hackers proved it was easy to fool its own version using a photo of its owner.

4 How the mask trickery works Credit: Bkav

The smartphone rival admitted the flaw but said that it never claimed facial recognition was uncrackable.

Bkav has gone to extreme lengths to unlock the iPhone X and while £115 is just a fraction of the £1,000 price tag, it seems unlikely that criminals are going to recreate each owners' faces before nicking their gadgets.

4 The facemask was made using 3D printed features as well as specially edited 2D images to create shadow and angles Credit: YouTube/Bjav

But it could prove problematic for high profile names, a spokesperson said.

They said: " Potential targets shall not be regular users, but billionaires, leaders of major corporations, nation leaders and agents like FBI need to understand the Face ID's issue [sic].

Simple trick shows how you can get rid of stock iPhone apps

"Security units' competitors, commercial rivals of corporations, and even nations might benefit from our proof of concept."

Hackers or spies could use this method to try and learn all the top-secret details after nicking a politician or journalist's phone, for example.

4 The iPhone X costs around £1,000 Credit: Apple

Apple said that its Face ID will continually learn by constantly taking selfies of its owner to create a very detailed profile.

That might be why it was easily tricked just a week after purchase.

Apple has worked with mask makers to make sure scenarios like these can't happen.

Speaking at the iPhone X launch event in September, Apple's Senior Vice President Phil Schiller said: "They [Apple workers] have even gone and worked with professional mask makers and makeup artists in Hollywood to protect against these attempts to beat Face ID".

Here are the Apple iPhone X's coolest features - including animojis

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.