ARTICLE TITLE: Virginia Courts’ Algorithmic Recidivism Risk Assessment Failed to Lower Incarceration Rates
We evaluate the impacts of adopting algorithmic risk assessments in sentencing. We find that judges changed sentencing practices in response to the risk assessment, but that discretion played a large role in mediating its impact. Judges deviated from the recommendations associated with the algorithm in systematic ways, suggestive of alternative objectives at sentencing. As a result, risk assessment did not lead to detectable gains in terms of public safety or reduced incarceration rates. Using simulations, we show that strict adherence to the sentencing recommendations associated with the algorithm would have led to some benefits (a sharp reduction in incarceration) but also some costs (a slight increase in recidivism and an increase in relative sentences for the young). Discretion mitigated the costs at the expense of reducing the benefits.
Algorithmic Risk Assessment in the Hands of Humans
Algorithmic predictions of future offending, known as risk assessments, are prolif- erating in criminal justice. They are used to help inform decision-making at almost every stage of the criminal proceedings: setting bail, sentencing, determining proba- tion supervision levels, placement within the prison system, and parole. Developed by statistically analyzing court and police records to identify which factors best predict recidivism, risk assessment tools are widely believed to be more accurate than humans (Grove and Meehl, 1996; Lin et al., 2020). Risk assessment’s proponents argue that we can lower incarceration rates and/or crime by making incarceration decisions on the basis of machine predictions (M) instead of human intuition (H) (Berk et al., 2016; Jung et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2018).
Research in this area has largely made the simplifying assumption that machines would take the place of humans (M vs H). But in the real world, risk assessments are used almost exclusively as a supplement to human discretion (M + H). Judges are free to follow or ignore the recommendations associated with the risk assessment. They may override the risk assessment when they think it’s wrong, and they may override it when they are pursuing alternative goals. Thus, the relevant question is not man vs machine but rather ‘how do the two interact?’ The impact of risk assessment depends not only on the properties of the algorithm, but on how the algorithm enters into the objective function of its user. This can lead to unexpected results.
This study is about what happens when risk assessments are placed in the hands of humans. In the early 2000s, Virginia courts began using risk assessments at sentencing for defendants convicted of nonviolent offenses. They were incorporated into the sen- tence guidelines in order to divert a large share of low-risk nonviolent offenders from jail or prison. Other offenders were not affected by the policy change, and judges retained final authority over sentencing. We evaluate the impacts of risk assessment adoption to provide new information about how these tools are used, who they impact most, and to what extent their use results in a reduction in incarceration and/or crime. We find that risk assessment use did not bring any detectable benefit in terms of public safety or reduced incarceration. We argue that this is likely due to conflicting objectives in sentencing. Judges used their discretion to mitigate some of the adverse consequences of risk assessment adoption at the expense of reducing potential gains.
We begin by evaluating whether risk assessment affected sentencing at all, as well as whether use changed over time. Our first strategy takes advantage of the fact that those who score right below the low-risk cutoff get a diversion recommendation, while those who score right above it do not. Using regression discontinuity, we find sharp changes in sentencing around the low-risk cutoff: being marginally above the cutoff leads to a 6.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of incarceration and
a sentence that is approximately 28% longer. Our second strategy is an event study design that documents a sharp increase in the correlation between sentencing and the predicted risk score that corresponds with the adoption of risk assessment. Finally, we use both of these methods to show that judges used the risk assessment most in the first few years after it was adopted. After that, they appear to have mostly discontinued use.
We next evaluate how risk assessment’s use affected sentencing relative to the sta- tus quo (i.e., judicial decision-making without risk assessment). We use a difference- in-differences research design that compares risk-assessment-eligible/-ineligible defen- dants before/after risk assessment was adopted. We benchmark our estimates of the impacts of risk assessment ‘in the hands of humans’ against simulations of ‘sentencing by algorithm,’ or risk assessment use without discretion. Following Virginia policy, our simulated sentences entail automatic diversion for low-risk defendants after risk assessment was adopted.
Sentencing by algorithm would have resulted in a sharp decrease in both the prob- ability of incarceration and the sentence length. In practice, however, judges diverted far fewer individuals than were recommended by the algorithm. The net effect on both the incarceration rate and sentence length was near zero and confidence intervals allow us to reject even small decreases. In other words, prison and jail terms appear to have been reallocated from defendants rated low-risk to those rated high-risk so that overall incarceration for nonviolent offenders remained the same.
We then look at discretion in use. Judges failed to divert low-risk defendants 57% of the time, and diverted 27% of high-risk defendants against recommendation. This suggests that judges respond to the risk assessment selectively. We run a series of tests to see which demographic factors predict deviating upwards or downwards in sentencing. We find that, conditional on the risk score, judges are substantially more lenient with young defendants than older defendants and substantially harsher on Black defendants than non-Black defendants. These disparities are not explained by actual differences in recidivism risk across race or age.
Next, we explore how risk assessment affected race and age disparities. As previ- ously, we benchmark our estimates of risk assessment in the hands of humans against simulated impacts of sentencing by algorithm. Using a triple-differences design, we find suggestive evidence that sentencing by algorithm would have led to a 8% rela- tive increase in the length of the sentence for Black defendants, significant only at the 10% level. Our estimates for the actual impact on racial disparities, however, are null. Standard errors preclude ruling out a moderate-sized increase or decrease.
In contrast, sentencing by algorithm would have led to a sharp 24% increase in relative sentence length for young defendants. However, judicial discretion mitigated
the adverse impacts on this demographic group. While risk assessment use did increase age disparities, the magnitude of the increase (12%) was half as much as it would have been in the absence of discretion.
Finally, we evaluate risk assessment’s impact on public safety. Using the same difference-in-differences design, we find no evidence that risk assessment use reduced recidivism. We can reject any reduction greater than 0.1 percentage points in the likeli- hood of a new felony conviction within three years, over a mean of 19 percentage points. We also conduct simulations of recidivism effects under sentencing by algorithm, with the caveat that these require strong assumptions about counterfactual crime rates. Our simulations suggest that sentencing by algorithm would have led to a 1.5 percentage point increase in recidivism. Virginia’s risk assessment policy was designed to increase release rates, thereby mechanically increasing the potential for accruing new charges and convictions.
In theory, reshuffling jail beds to increase incarceration for those with high-risk scores and reduce it for those with low-risk scores should have led to reduced recidivism. While we cannot provide a definitive answer as to why that did not happen, we suggest a partial explanation. Sentencing is a multivalent decision, and incapacitating those at highest risk of reoffending is only one objective. Other objectives may occasionally conflict. For instance, young age is one of the most important predictors of recidivism and adds more points to the risk score than any other factor. But if judges are reluctant to give long sentences to young people, this makes one of the most important inputs to the risk score effectively off-limits. This, combined with other instances in which judges may have deviated from the risk score to follow alternative goals, could undermine the potential gains from risk assessment use. A risk assessment that is neutered by conflicting goals may not result in substantial improvements to public safety.
tion affected overall sentencing and race/age disparities and benchmarks this against simulations of sentencing by algorithm. This section also shows which demographic features predict deviations from the risk score. Section 5 looks at risk assessment’s impact on recidivism. Section 6 concludes.
2 Background
2.1 Algorithmic risk assessment in criminal justice
Many decisions made in criminal justice take predictions about the risk of commit- ting crime at least partially into account. In some settings, such as sentencing, risk of future crime is one factor among a wide range of legally permissible considerations. In others, such as bail, the legally permissible rationales are often limited to the risk of crime, nonappearance, or tampering with the case. Such legal formalities, however, are hard to enforce and thus may have little constraining power. In practice, judges usu- ally have substantial latitude to make discretionary decisions on the basis of whatever factors they feel are relevant.
Risk assessment tools aim to improve the accuracy of crime predictions and are now used broadly in criminal justice: in determining bail and pretrial custody, probation supervision levels, offender placement within the prison system, release on parole, and in sentencing.2 Risk assessment tools are used at sentencing in 27 states; at least six additional states use risk assessment at sentencing in some counties. (See Appendix A.1 for a full list.)
The construction and implementation of risk assessment follows a fairly typical pattern across different jurisdictions and even across different settings (e.g., sentencing, bail, etc.). Here we describe the standard approach, which Virginia follows as well. Risk assessment tools are built by statistically analyzing court and/or police records to evaluate how various inputs correlate to measures of future offending, such as rearrest or reconviction. The most common inputs include age, gender, and criminal history (prior convictions, arrests, periods of incarceration, etc.). Almost all risk assessment tools currently used today take the form of a ‘weighted checklist,’ where inputs are assigned point values based on their statistical correlation with future offending, as measured by rearrest or reconviction. The risk score is the sum of the points. This type of simple linear model is not able to exploit nonlinear or interactive relationships in the same way that more sophisticated machine learning algorithms do. However, evidence suggests that simple tools, with integer weights and only a handful of inputs,
2Predictive algorithms are also used in policing, but the tools and applications differ somewhat from the court context discussed in this paper.
5
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3489440

can rival the accuracy of complex prediction models in a wide variety of domains (Jung et al., 2017).3 As discussed below, we find this to be true in our setting as well. Beyond accuracy, an integer-weighted model is preferred due to ease of implementation: the administrator can simply add up the points by hand.
Judges are almost never provided with statistical probabilities. Rather, they are in- formed of the defendant’s risk classification. Defendants who score above/below certain cutoffs in the risk score will receive classifications such as low, moderate or high-risk, or a ranking within a limited range (e.g., 1 through 6). Usually, jurisdictions will have a policy that states which intervention (e.g., probation or incarceration) is recommended for defendants with different risk classifications. For example, jurisdictions might use a grid method, where the severity of the offense and the risk classification determine the recommended sentence or bail amount. However, judges or other criminal jus- tice decision-makers almost always retain discretion to deviate from the recommended actions.
2.2 Felony sentencing in Virginia
Virginia is one of the earliest adopters of criminal justice risk assessments. Beyond that, the state is fairly typical in terms of sentencing practices, incarceration rates, andracialcomposition.4 Virginiausesavoluntarysentenceguidelinesregimeinwhich judgesarerecommended,butnotrequired,tosentencewithinaparticularrange.5 This system has been in place since the 1980s. In 1994, Virginia adopted a major ‘truth- in-sentencing’ reform act that abolished parole, mandated that offenders serve at least 85% of their sentence, and increased sentences for violent offenders. In order to free up state prison beds for violent offenders who were expected to serve longer terms as a result of the reform, Virginia also set the goal of diverting 25% of nonviolent offenders from jail or prison. Risk assessment was the proposed method of achieving this. It was to be designed and implemented by the newly founded Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission (VCSC, or Sentencing Commission).
3Dressel and Farid (2018) show that a simple classifier that includes only two inputs– age and the number of prior convictions–performs as well as a nonlinear support vector machine with a wider range of inputs and as well as the commonly used COMPAS risk assessment algorithm. Angelino et al. (2017) and Jung et al. (2017) show similar results in other criminal justice contexts.
4In 2003, the year that risk assessment was adopted in sentencing, Virginia had 472 incarcerated prisoners per 100,000 people, compared to a national average of 482 per 100,000 (Harrison and Beck, 2004). Non- Hispanic Whites were 68% of the population, compared to a U.S. average of 67%. However, Virginia had a slightly larger Black population and slightly smaller Hispanic population (19% and 6% respectively) compared to the rest of the country (12% and 13%) (usafacts.org). Virginia is one of 17 states that use sentence guidelines and one of 18 states that have abolished parole (Mitchell, 2017).
5The information in this section was derived from interviews in 2019 with the director of the Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission, Meredith Farrar-Owens, as well as Ostrom et al. (1999); VCSC (2001); Ostrom et al. (2002).

While most of the ‘truth-in-sentencing’ reforms were implemented immediately after the bill passed, risk assessment came later. The VCSC designed a new risk tool for nonviolent offenders in the late 1990s and piloted it in six judicial circuits. They launched a revised risk assessment statewide on July 1, 2002. This tool was in use until 2013, when several further revisions were made. Our analysis is focused around the time that risk assessment was adopted statewide, and uses data from judicial circuits that did not participate in the pilot.6
Virginia’s risk assessment was developed by running logistic regression on a ran- domly selected sample of nonviolent offenders who either had received a non-carceral sentence or had recently been released from jail or prison. It was designed to predict which defendants would be reconvicted of a felony within three years of their return to the community. Its inputs include indicators for whether the charge of conviction was drug, larceny, or fraud; whether there were any additional offenses; gender, age, em- ployment, and marital status; recent arrests or confinement; prior felony convictions or adjudications; and prior adult incarcerations. The logistic regression coefficients were converted into weights and summed to produce a risk assessment score between 0 and 95.
Those who score below a 36 in Virginia’s risk assessment are classified as low-risk.7 This cutoff score was selected based on the legal mandate to identify the 25% lowest risk defendants for diversion from jail or prison. For defendants whose guidelines- recommended sentence is prison (more than 12 months), diversion means probation or a shorter jail sentence. For defendants whose guidelines-recommended sentence is jail (less than or equal to 12 months), diversion means probation or some other non-carceral sentence.
The risk scores, as well as the sentence guidelines, are calculated using a set of worksheets that are filled out by a probation officer or a prosecutor either during the plea-bargaining process or after conviction. The nonviolent risk assessment is only administered on eligible cases: a defendant must be convicted of a drug, larceny or fraud charge, and cannot have a prior or current conviction for a violent crime. Since the tool is designed for diversion, only those who were recommended for jail or prison by the sentence guidelines are eligible. The final two eligibility requirements are that defendants must not have sold large quantities of cocaine or been convicted of an offense that includes a mandatory term of incarceration.
After conviction, the risk assessment and sentence guidelines worksheets are pro-
6We have also evaluated the impacts of risk assessment in the pilot circuits and find results that are qualitatively similar to those shown here. We do not make use of the pilot period in a panel difference-in- difference design because the instrument implemented then was meaningfully different from the one later implemented statewide.
7This cutoff was increased by three points on July 1, 2004. Unfortunately, this change affected too few defendants to be able to evaluate its impacts.
7
vided to the judge for sentencing.8 The cover page of the worksheets prominently dis- plays the sentence range that is recommended by the guidelines. The midpoint of the range is referred to as the ‘guidelines-recommended sentence.’ A sentence within this range is considered guidelines-compliant. Nonviolent offenders have a checkbox with the label ‘Recommended for Alternative Punishment’ right underneath the guidelines- recommended sentence. If the defendant scores below the low-risk cutoff, this box will be checked, and the set of guidelines-compliant sentences is expanded to include release without incarceration. If a judge chooses a sentence that is not guidelines- compliant, they must provide a written justification. A judge who is interested in the exact risk score, as opposed to merely the risk classification and its associated sentence-recommendation, can find it by flipping through the pages of the worksheets.
After sentencing, the final sentence is written on a separate worksheet. All sheets are mailed to the Sentencing Commission, which digitizes the information and maintains a database on all felony sentences in Virginia. The VCSC also maintains detailed records of every change to the sentence guidelines and every change to sentencing policy going back at least to 1995. This meticulous record-keeping helps ensure that there are no important policy changes concurrent to the adoption of risk assessment that would confound our analysis. The only important policy change around the time of risk assessment adoption pertains to those convicted of sex offenses.9 Sex offenders constitute only 3% of the sample and are dropped from the analysis. Beyond this, we find only trivial changes to sentencing practices during the time period of our main analysis.10
In this paper, we frequently discuss how ‘judges’ use the risk assessment tool. We use this language for purposes of concision, and because judges are formally responsible for determining the sentence. However, other criminal justice actors are also influential. About 85% of felony convictions in Virginia come from guilty pleas, which are often accompaniedbysentencingagreementsbetweentheprosecutionandthedefense.11 The risk assessment information is available during plea negotiations, and both prosecutors and public defenders report using it frequently (Metz et al., 2020).12 This could be
8The risk assessment worksheet and the sentencing cover sheet are provided at the end of the Appendix.
9Virginia adopted a different risk assessment for sex offenders in fiscal year 2002.
10The only change concurrent with the adoption of the nonviolent risk assessment is a policy shift that makes it easier for prosecutors and probation officers to access juvenile records. However, this change applies to all cases, and we have no reason to believe that this will impact risk-assessment-eligible defendants more
than anyone else.
11Approximately 10% of convictions come from a bench trial, in which the judge adjudicates guilt or
innocence as well as determining the sentence (VCSC, 2003). Jury trials constitute roughly 2% of convictions. The jury is responsible for the sentence in these cases, although the judge is authorized to reduce the sentence if he or she so chooses. The remainder are Alford pleas, in which the defendant doesn’t contest the adjudication but doesn’t admit guilt either.
12Both prosecutors and defense attorneys, however, report some distrust of the tool and describe using it 8
 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3489440

because they independently value the predicted likelihood of reoffending in determining the appropriate sentence. It could also be because plea negotiations occur within the ‘shadow of the judge.’ Namely, since negotiated sentences need to be approved by the judge, plea negotiations are influenced by expectations about what the judge is likely to approve.
Judges are appointed by majority vote of the Virginia General Assembly.13 They are up for reappointment every eight years. The reappointment procedure includes an interview with the legislative committee and then a vote in the General Assembly. Compliance with sentencing guidelines is monitored by the Sentencing Commission, reported (at the state level) in an annual report, and became formally included in the reappointment evaluation in 2009. Compliance rates have hovered around 80% since fiscal year 2000, with deviations evenly split between aggravation and mitigation.14
2.3 Data and descriptive statistics
The data used in this paper comes from two sources. The primary data source is the VCSC, which collects and maintains records on all felony sentences in the state of Vir- ginia since 1995. This data was acquired through a public records request and contains information relevant to the case, such as charges, sentences, guidelines-recommended sentences, and risk score. In addition, it contains dozens of variables that are used to calculate the risk score and the guidelines-recommended sentence, such as those pertaining to the current offense, the criminal record, and personal characteristics of the defendant. Unfortunately, neither the risk score nor the exact variables used to calculate the risk score are available for defendants who did not receive one. Therefore we do not have risk score information for eligible defendants sentenced before risk as- sessment was adopted, nor for defendants whose charge/criminal history makes them ineligible for risk assessment. VCSC data also does not contain the race or gender of the defendants.
Race, gender, and an alternative recidivism measure (new charges) were obtained by matching the Sentencing Commission data with bulk court records scraped from a public online site. For most counties, court records from as far back as 2000 can be found online.15 Alexandria and Fairfax counties are an exception; we were unable to match VCSC data back to the original court records for cases in these counties. The
in conjunction with their own experience-based assessment (Metz et al., 2020).
13The head prosecutors, known in Virginia as Commonwealth’s Attorneys, are directly elected to serve
four-year terms. They set policy, manage operations in each individual jurisdiction, and appoint line prose- cutors to carry out the day-to-day work of prosecution

match was conducted using the fastLink package in R, which conducts probabilistic matching across multiple variables (Enamorado et al., 2019). The variables used for the match include the first name, last name, offense date, birth month, and county of arrest. With a probabilistic match threshold of 0.92, 96% of post-1999 cases in the Sentencing Commission data (excluding Alexandria and Fairfax) found a match in the court records.
As mentioned previously, we have two primary sample restrictions: we drop those convicted of sex offenses (3% of the sample) and we drop judicial circuits that had already piloted a different risk assessment (23%). When we use the phrase ‘all cases’ in this paper, we are referring to all cases after pilot circuits and sex offenders have been dropped.
Descriptive statistics for defendants sentenced in the two years preceding risk as- sessment adoption (fiscal years 2001-2002) can be found in Table 1. The first column shows data for risk-assessment-eligible offenders. This includes all defendants who were convicted of a drug, larceny, or fraud offense; whose guidelines-recommended sentence was jail or prison; and who did not have a current or prior violent conviction.16 The second column shows descriptive statistics for all other offenders: the primary control group for the difference-in-differences analysis. The third column shows the full sample.
Roughly 1/3 of the sample is convicted of a risk-assessment-eligible offense. Drug convictions make up the largest share of these cases, followed by larceny and then fraud. A substantial portion of the ineligible group is also convicted of these three offenses. Other common offenses in this category include traffic, assault, burglary, and robbery. The probability of incarceration is slightly higher for the eligible group, likely because one of the eligibility criteria is a guidelines-recommended sentence of jail or prison. However, the eligible group lacks the long right sentencing tail seen in violent offenses. The average sentence for the ineligible group is almost twice as long as that of the eligible group.
Our primary measure of recidivism is an indicator for having been convicted of a new felony offense in the state of Virginia, committed within three years of the original sentencing date. We focus on this measure because it is very similar to the target variable that Virginia’s nonviolent risk assessment was trained to predict. The main difference is that our time-counter for recidivism begins at sentencing, and Virginia’s time counter for recidivism begins at release. In our recidivism measure, incarcerated defendants will be incapacitated (at least for crimes in which the victims are outside of prison walls) during a portion of the recidivism time window. This is intentional:
16This group is expected to be slightly over-inclusive, since we can’t identify offenders who would have been ineligible due to a mandatory minimum sentence or large quantities of cocaine unless they were sentenced during the post-risk-assessment period. However, in cases for which data is available, these ineligibility criteria rule out only 2% and 1% of cases, respectively.
