U.S. stock market crash lasting 36 minutes in May 6, 2010

The DJIA on May 6, 2010 (11:00 AM – 4:00 PM EDT)

The May 6, 2010, flash crash,[1][2][3] also known as the crash of 2:45 or simply the flash crash, was a United States trillion-dollar[4] flash crash (a type of stock market crash) which started at 2:32 p.m. EDT and lasted for approximately 36 minutes.[5]

Overview [ edit ]

Stock indices, such as the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and Nasdaq Composite, collapsed and rebounded very rapidly.[5] The Dow Jones Industrial Average had its second biggest intraday point decline (from the opening) up to that point,[5] plunging 998.5 points (about 9%), most within minutes, only to recover a large part of the loss.[6][7] It was also the second-largest intraday point swing (difference between intraday high and intraday low) up to that point, at 1,010.14 points.[5][6][8][9] The prices of stocks, stock index futures, options and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) were volatile, thus trading volume spiked.[5]: 3 A CFTC 2014 report described it as one of the most turbulent periods in the history of financial markets.[5]

New regulations put in place following the 2010 flash crash[10] proved to be inadequate to protect investors in the August 24, 2015, flash crash — "when the price of many ETFs appeared to come unhinged from their underlying value"[10] — and ETFs were subsequently put under greater scrutiny by regulators and investors.[10]

On April 21, 2015, nearly five years after the incident, the U.S. Department of Justice laid 22 criminal counts, including fraud and market manipulation against Navinder Singh Sarao, a British Indian financial trader. Among the charges included was the use of spoofing algorithms; just prior to the flash crash, he placed orders for thousands of E-mini S&P 500 stock index futures contracts which he planned on canceling later.[11] These orders amounting to about "$200 million worth of bets that the market would fall" were "replaced or modified 19,000 times" before they were canceled.[11] Spoofing, layering, and front running are now banned.[4]

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) investigation concluded that Sarao "was at least significantly responsible for the order imbalances" in the derivatives market which affected stock markets and exacerbated the flash crash.[11] Sarao began his alleged market manipulation in 2009 with commercially available trading software whose code he modified "so he could rapidly place and cancel orders automatically".[11] Traders Magazine journalist, John Bates, argued that blaming a 36-year-old small-time trader who worked from his parents' modest stucco house in suburban west London[11] for sparking a trillion-dollar stock market crash is "a little bit like blaming lightning for starting a fire" and that the investigation was lengthened because regulators used "bicycles to try and catch Ferraris". Furthermore, he concluded that by April 2015, traders can still manipulate and impact markets in spite of regulators and banks' new, improved monitoring of automated trade systems.[4]

In May 2014, a CFTC report concluded that high-frequency traders "did not cause the Flash Crash, but contributed to it by demanding immediacy ahead of other market participants".[5]

Some recent peer-reviewed research shows that flash crashes are not isolated occurrences, but have occurred quite often. Gao and Mizrach studied US equities over the period of 1993–2011. They show that breakdowns in market quality (such as flash crashes) have occurred in every year they examined and that, apart from the financial crisis, such problems have declined since the introduction of Reg NMS. They also show that 2010, while infamous for the flash crash, was not a year with an inordinate number of breakdowns in market quality.[12]

Background [ edit ]

On May 6, 2010, U.S. stock markets opened and the Dow was down, and trended that way for most of the day on worries about the debt crisis in Greece. At 2:42 p.m., with the Dow down more than 300 points for the day, the equity market began to fall rapidly, dropping an additional 600 points in 5 minutes for a loss of nearly 1,000 points for the day by 2:47 p.m. Twenty minutes later, by 3:07 p.m., the market had regained most of the 600-point drop.[13]: 1 At the time of the flash crash, in May 2010, high-frequency traders were taking advantage of unintended consequences of the consolidation of the U.S. financial regulations into Regulation NMS,[4][14] designed to modernize and strengthen the United States National Market System for equity securities.[15]: 641 The Reg NMS, promulgated and described by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, was intended to assure that investors received the best price executions for their orders by encouraging competition in the marketplace, created attractive new opportunities for high-frequency-traders. Activities such as spoofing, layering and front running were banned by 2015.[16] This rule was designed to give investors the best possible price when dealing in stocks, even if that price was not on the exchange that received the order.[17]: 171

Explanation [ edit ]

Early theories [ edit ]

At first, while the regulatory agencies and the United States Congress announced investigations into the crash,[18] no specific reason for the 600-point plunge was identified. Investigators focused on a number of possible causes, including a confluence of computer-automated trades, or possibly an error by human traders. By the first weekend, regulators had discounted the possibility of trader error and focused on automated trades conducted on exchanges other than the NYSE. However, CME Group, a large futures exchange, stated that, insofar as stock index futures traded on CME Group were concerned, its investigation found no evidence for this or that high-frequency trading played a role, and in fact concluded that automated trading had contributed to market stability during the period of the crash.[19] Others speculate that an intermarket sweep order may have played a role in triggering the crash.[20]

Several plausible theories were put forward to explain the plunge.

SEC/CFTC report [ edit ]

On September 30, 2010, after almost five months of investigations led by Gregg E. Berman,[41][42] the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) issued a joint report titled "Findings Regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010" identifying the sequence of events leading to the flash crash.[43]

The joint 2010 report "portrayed a market so fragmented and fragile that a single large trade could send stocks into a sudden spiral",[25] and detailed how a large mutual fund firm selling an unusually large number of E-Mini S&P contracts first exhausted available buyers, and then how high-frequency traders (HFT) started aggressively selling, accelerating the effect of the mutual fund's selling and contributing to the sharp price declines that day.[44][25]

The SEC and CFTC joint 2010 report itself says that "May 6 started as an unusually turbulent day for the markets" and that by the early afternoon "broadly negative market sentiment was already affecting an increase in the price volatility of some individual securities". At 2:32 p.m. (EDT), against a "backdrop of unusually high volatility and thinning liquidity" that day, a large fundamental trader (known to be Waddell & Reed Financial Inc.[25]) "initiated a sell program to sell a total of 75,000 E-Mini S&P contracts (valued at approximately $4.1 billion) as a hedge to an existing equity position". The report says that this was an unusually large position and that the computer algorithm the trader used to trade the position was set to "target an execution rate set to 9% of the trading volume calculated over the previous minute, but without regard to price or time".[43]

As the large seller's trades were executed in the futures market, buyers included high-frequency trading firms—trading firms that specialize in high-speed trading and rarely hold on to any given position for very long—and within minutes these high-frequency trading firms started trying to sell the long futures contracts they had just picked up from the mutual fund.[25] The Wall Street Journal quoted the joint report, "'HFTs [then] began to quickly buy and then resell contracts to each other—generating a 'hot-potato' volume effect as the same positions were passed rapidly back and forth.'"[25] The combined sales by the large seller and high-frequency firms quickly drove "the E-Mini price down 3% in just four minutes".[25]

From the SEC/CFTC report:[43]

The combined selling pressure from the sell algorithm, HFTs, and other traders drove the price of the E-Mini S&P 500 down approximately 3% in just four minutes from the beginning of 2:41 p.m. through the end of 2:44 p.m. During this same time cross-market arbitrageurs who did buy the E-Mini S&P 500, simultaneously sold equivalent amounts in the equities markets, driving the price of SPY (an exchange-traded fund which represents the S&P 500 index) also down approximately 3%. Still lacking sufficient demand from fundamental buyers or cross-market arbitrageurs, HFTs began to quickly buy and then resell contracts to each other—generating a “hot-potato” volume effect as the same positions were rapidly passed back and forth. Between 2:45:13 and 2:45:27, HFTs traded over 27,000 contracts, which accounted for about 49 percent of the total trading volume, while buying only about 200 additional contracts net.

As prices in the futures market fell, there was a spillover into the equities markets. The computer systems used by most high-frequency trading firms to keep track of market activity decided to pause trading, and those firms then scaled back their trading or withdrew from the markets altogether.[45]

The New York Times then noted, "Automatic computerized traders on the stock market shut down as they detected the sharp rise in buying and selling".[27] As computerized high-frequency traders exited the stock market, the resulting lack of liquidity "caused shares of some prominent companies like Procter & Gamble and Accenture to trade down as low as a penny or as high as $100,000".[27] These extreme prices also resulted from "market internalizers",[46][47][48] firms that usually trade with customer orders from their own inventory instead of sending those orders to exchanges, "routing 'most, if not all,' retail orders to the public markets—a flood of unusual selling pressure that sucked up more dwindling liquidity".[28]

While some firms exited the market, firms that remained in the market exacerbated price declines because they "'escalated their aggressive selling' during the downdraft".[25] High-frequency firms during the crisis, like other firms, were net sellers, contributing to the crash.[26][27][28]

The joint report continued: "At 2:45:28 p.m., trading on the E-Mini was paused for five seconds when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange ('CME') Stop Logic Functionality was triggered in order to prevent a cascade of further price declines. In that short period of time, sell-side pressure in the E-Mini was partly alleviated and buy-side interest increased. When trading resumed at 2:45:33 p.m., prices stabilized and shortly thereafter, the E-Mini began to recover, followed by the SPY".[43] After a short while, as market participants had "time to react and verify the integrity of their data and systems, buy-side and sell-side interest returned and an orderly price discovery process began to function", and by 3:00 p.m., most stocks "had reverted back to trading at prices reflecting true consensus values".[43]

Criticism of the SEC/CFTC report [ edit ]

A few hours after the release of the 104-page SEC/CFTC 2010 report, a number of critics stated that blaming a single order (from Waddell & Reed) for triggering the event was disingenuous. Most prominent of all, the CME issued within 24 hours a rare press release in which it argued against the SEC/CFTC explanation:[49]

Futures and options markets are hedging and risk transfer markets. The report references a series of bona fide hedging transactions, totaling 75,000 contracts, entered into by an institutional asset manager to hedge a portion of the risk in its $75 billion investment portfolio in response to global economic events and the fundamentally deteriorating market conditions that day. The 75,000 contracts represented 1.3% of the total E-Mini S&P 500 volume of 5.7 million contracts on May 6 and less than 9% of the volume during the time period in which the orders were executed. The prevailing market sentiment was evident well before these orders were placed, and the orders, as well as the manner in which they were entered, were both legitimate and consistent with market practices. These hedging orders were entered in relatively small quantities and in a manner designed to dynamically adapt to market liquidity by participating in a target percentage of 9% of the volume executed in the market. As a result of the significant volumes traded in the market, the hedge was completed in approximately twenty minutes, with more than half of the participant's volume executed as the market rallied—not as the market declined. Additionally, the aggregate size of this participant's orders was not known to other market participants. Additionally, the most precipitous period of market decline in the E-Mini S&P 500 futures on May 6 occurred during the 3½ minute period immediately preceding the market bottom that was established at 13:45:28. During that period, the participant hedging its portfolio represented less than 5% of the total volume of sales in the market.

David Leinweber, director of the Center for Innovative Financial Technology at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, was invited by The Journal of Portfolio Management to write an editorial, in which he openly criticized the government's technological capabilities and inability to study today's markets. Leinweber wrote:[50]

The heads of the SEC and CFTC often point out that they are running an IT museum. They have photographic evidence to prove it—the highest-tech background that The New York Times (on September 21, 2010) could find for a photo of Gregg Berman, the SEC’s point man on the flash, was a corner with five PCs, a Bloomberg, a printer, a fax, and three TVs on the wall with several large clocks. A better measure of the inadequacy of the current mélange of IT antiquities is that the SEC/CFTC report on the May 6 crash was released on September 30, 2010. Taking nearly five months to analyze the wildest ever five minutes of market data is unacceptable. CFTC Chair Gensler specifically blamed the delay on the “enormous” effort to collect and analyze data. What an enormous mess it is.

Nanex, a leading firm specialized in the analysis of high-frequency data, also pointed out to several inconsistencies in the CFTC study:[51]

Based on interviews and our own independent matching of the 6,438 W&R executions to the 147,577 CME executions during that time, we know for certain that the algorithm used by W&R never took nor required liquidity. It always posted sell orders above the market and waited for a buyer; it never crossed the bid/ask spread. That means that none of the 6,438 trades were executed by hitting a bid. [...] [S]tatements from page 36 of Kirilenko's paper[5] cast serious doubt on the credibility of their analysis. [...] It is widely believed that the "sell program" refers to the algo selling the W&R contracts. However, based on the statements above, this cannot be true. The sell program must be referring to a different algo, or Kirilenko's analysis is fundamentally flawed, because the paper incorrectly identifies trades that hit the bid as executions by the W&R algo.

Academic research [ edit ]

"Order flow toxicity" (measured as CDF [VPIN]) was at historically high levels one hour prior to the flash crash

External videos Video of the S&P500 futures during the flash crash

As of July 2011, only one theory on the causes of the flash crash was published by a Journal Citation Reports indexed, peer-reviewed scientific journal.[52] It was reported in 2011 that one hour before its collapse in 2010, the stock market registered the highest reading of "toxic order imbalance" in previous history.[52] The authors of this 2011 paper apply widely accepted market microstructure models to understand the behavior of prices in the minutes and hours prior to the crash. According to this paper, "order flow toxicity" can be measured as the probability that informed traders (e.g., hedge funds) adversely select uninformed traders (e.g., market makers). For that purpose, they developed the Volume-Synchronized Probability of Informed Trading (VPIN) Flow Toxicity metric, which delivered a real-time estimate of the conditions under which liquidity is being provided. If the order imbalance becomes too toxic, market makers are forced out of the market. As they withdraw, liquidity disappears, which increases even more the concentration of toxic flow in the overall volume, which triggers a feedback mechanism that forces even more market makers out. This cascading effect has caused hundreds of liquidity-induced crashes in the past, the flash crash being one (major) example of it.

Network view of the market during the simulated flash crash. The figure demonstrates the trading behaviors between different players in the system.[53]

However, independent studies published in 2013 strongly disputed the claim that one hour before its collapse in 2010, the stock market registered the highest reading of "toxic order imbalance" in previous history.[54][55][56] In particular, in 2011 Andersen and Bondarenko conducted a comprehensive investigation of the two main versions of VPIN used by its creators, one based on the standard tick-rule (or TR-VPIN)[52][57][58] and the other based on Bulk Volume Classification (or BVC-VPIN).[59] They find that the value of TR-VPIN (BVC-VPIN) one hour before the crash "was surpassed on 71 (189) preceding days, constituting 11.7% (31.2%) of the pre-crash sample". Similarly, the value of TR-VPIN (BVC-VPIN) at the start of the crash was "topped on 26 (49) preceding days, or 4.3% (8.1%) of the pre-crash sample".[55]

Note that the source of increasing "order flow toxicity" on May 6, 2010, is not determined in Easley, Lopez de Prado, and O'Hara's 2011 publication.[52] Whether a dominant source of toxic order flow on May 6, 2010, was from firms representing public investors or whether a dominant source was intermediary or other proprietary traders could have a significant effect on regulatory proposals put forward to prevent another flash crash. According to Bloomberg, the VPIN metric is the subject of a pending patent application filed by the paper's three authors, Maureen O'Hara and David Easley of Cornell University, and Marcos Lopez de Prado, of Tudor Investment Corporation.[60]

A study of VPIN[61] by scientists from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory cited the 2011 conclusions of Easley, Lopez de Prado and O'Hara for VPIN on S&P 500 futures[52] but provided no independent confirmation for the claim that VPIN reached its historical high one hour before the crash:

With suitable parameters, [Easley, Lopez de Prado, and O'Hara] have shown that the [CDF of] VPIN reaches 0.9 more than an hour before the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010. This is the strongest early warning signal known to us at this time.

Network snapshots before (left) and during (right) the simulated flash crash. The last 400 transactions in the order-book are plotted by connecting the HFT agents who transact with each other. The node color indicates the inventory size of the HFT agent. When the market operates normally (left subplot), almost all of the HFT agents are in control of their inventory (greenish color). In crash period (right), most of the HFT agents gain large inventories (red) and the network is highly interconnected: over 85 percent of the transactions are HFT-HFT.[53]

The Chief Economist of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and several academic economists published a working paper containing a review and empirical analysis of trade data from the Flash Crash.[62] The authors examined the characteristics and activities of buyers and sellers in the Flash Crash and determined that a large seller, a mutual fund firm, exhausted available fundamental buyers and then triggered a cascade of selling by intermediaries, particularly high-frequency trading firms. Like the SEC/CFTC report described earlier, the authors call this cascade of selling "hot potato trading",[53] as high-frequency firms rapidly acquired and then liquidated positions among themselves at steadily declining prices.

The authors conclude:

Based on our analysis, we believe that High Frequency Traders exhibit trading patterns inconsistent with the traditional definition of market making. Specifically, High Frequency Traders aggressively trade in the direction of price changes. This activity comprises a large percentage of total trading volume, but does not result in a significant accumulation of inventory. As a result, whether under normal market conditions or during periods of high volatility, High Frequency Traders are not willing to accumulate large positions or absorb large losses. Moreover, their contribution to higher trading volumes may be mistaken for liquidity by Fundamental Traders. Finally, when rebalancing their positions, High Frequency Traders may compete for liquidity and amplify price volatility. Consequently, we believe, that irrespective of technology, markets can become fragile when imbalances arise as a result of large traders seeking to buy or sell quantities larger than intermediaries are willing to temporarily hold, and simultaneously long-term suppliers of liquidity are not forthcoming even if significant price concessions are offered.

Recent research on dynamical complex networks published in Nature Physics (2013) suggests that the 2010 Flash Crash may be an example of the "avoided transition" phenomenon in network systems with critical behavior.[63]

Evidence of market manipulation and arrest [ edit ]

In April 2015, Navinder Singh Sarao, an autistic[64][65] London-based point-and-click trader,[66] was arrested for his alleged role in the flash crash. According to criminal charges brought by the United States Department of Justice, Sarao allegedly used an automated program to generate large sell orders, pushing down prices, which he then canceled to buy at the lower market prices. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed civil charges against Sarao.[67][68] In August 2015, Sarao was released on a £50,000 bail with a full extradition hearing scheduled for September with the US Department of Justice. Sarao and his company, Nav Sarao Futures Limited, allegedly made more than $40 million in profit from trading from 2009 to 2015.[69]

During extradition proceedings he was represented by Richard Egan[70] of Tuckers Solicitors.[71]

As of 2017 Sarao's lawyers claim that all of his assets were stolen or otherwise lost in bad investments. Sarao was released on bail, banned from trading and placed under the care of his father.[72]

Sarao pleaded guilty to one count of electronic fraud and one count of spoofing.[73] In January 2020, he was given a sentence of one year's home confinement, with no jail time. The sentence was relatively lenient, as a result of prosecutors' emphasis on how much Sarao had cooperated with them, that he was not motivated by greed and his diagnosis of Asperger syndrome.[74][75][76][77]

Aftermath [ edit ]

Stock market reaction [ edit ]

A stock market anomaly, the major market indexes dropped by over 9% (including a roughly 7% decline in a roughly 15-minute span at approximately 2:45 p.m., on May 6, 2010)[78][79] before a partial rebound.[9] Temporarily, $1 trillion in market value disappeared.[80] While stock markets do crash, immediate rebounds are unprecedented. The stocks of eight major companies in the S&P 500 fell to one cent per share for a short time, including Accenture, CenterPoint Energy and Exelon; while other stocks, including Sotheby's, Apple Inc. and Hewlett-Packard, increased in value to over $100,000 in price.[8][81][82] Procter & Gamble in particular dropped nearly 37% before rebounding, within minutes, back to near its original levels.

Stocks continued to rebound in the following days, helped by a bailout package in Europe to help save the euro. The S&P 500 erased all losses within a week, but selling soon took over again and the indices reached lower depths within two weeks.

Congressional hearings [ edit ]

The NASDAQ released their timeline of the anomalies during U.S. Congressional House Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government-Sponsored Enterprises[83] hearings on the flash crash.[2] NASDAQ's timeline indicates that NYSE Arca may have played an early role and that the Chicago Board Options Exchange sent a message saying that NYSE Arca was "out of NBBO" (National best bid and offer). The Chicago Board Options Exchange, NASDAQ, NASDAQ OMX BX and BATS Exchange all declared self-help against NYSE Arca.[2]

SEC Chairwoman Mary Schapiro testified that "stub quotes" may have played a role in certain stocks that traded for 1 cent a share.[84] According to Schapiro:[85]

The absurd result of valuable stocks being executed for a penny likely was attributable to the use of a practice called "stub quoting." When a market order is submitted for a stock, if available liquidity has already been taken out, the market order will seek the next available liquidity, regardless of price. When a market maker’s liquidity has been exhausted, or if it is unwilling to provide liquidity, it may at that time submit what is called a stub quote—for example, an offer to buy a given stock at a penny. A stub quote is essentially a place holder quote because that quote would never—it is thought—be reached. When a market order is seeking liquidity and the only liquidity available is a penny-priced stub quote, the market order, by its terms, will execute against the stub quote. In this respect, automated trading systems will follow their coded logic regardless of outcome, while human involvement likely would have prevented these orders from executing at absurd prices. As noted below, we are reviewing the practice of displaying stub quotes that are never intended to be executed.

Trading curb [ edit ]

Officials announced that new trading curbs, also known as circuit breakers, would be tested during a six-month trial period ending on December 10, 2010. These circuit breakers would halt trading for five minutes on any S&P 500 stock that rises or falls more than 10 percent in a five-minute period.[86][87] The circuit breakers would only be installed to the 404 New York Stock Exchange listed S&P 500 stocks. The first circuit breakers were installed to only 5 of the S&P 500 companies on Friday, June 11, to experiment with the circuit breakers. The five stocks were EOG Resources, Genuine Parts, Harley Davidson, Ryder System and Zimmer Holdings. By Monday, June 14, 44 had them. By Tuesday, June 15, the number had grown to 223, and by Wednesday, June 16, all 404 companies had circuit breakers installed.[88] On June 16, 2010, trading in the Washington Post Company's shares were halted for five minutes after it became the first stock to trigger the new circuit breakers. Three erroneous NYSE Arca trades were said to have been the cause of the share price jump.[89]

On May 6, the markets only broke trades that were more than 60 percent away from the reference price in a process that was not transparent to market participants. A list of 'winners' and 'losers' created by this arbitrary measure has never been made public. By establishing clear and transparent standards for breaking erroneous trades, the new rules should help provide certainty in advance as to which trades will be broken, and allow market participants to better manage their risks.[90]

In a 2011 article that appeared on the Wall Street Journal on the eve of the anniversary of the 2010 "flash crash", it was reported that high-frequency traders were then less active in the stock market. Another article in the journal said trades by high-frequency traders had decreased to 53% of stock-market trading volume, from 61% in 2009.[91] Former Delaware senator Edward E. Kaufman and Michigan senator Carl Levin published a 2011 op-ed in The New York Times a year after the Flash Crash, sharply critical of what they perceived to be the SEC's apparent lack of action to prevent a recurrence.[92]

In 2011 high-frequency traders moved away from the stock market as there had been lower volatility and volume. The combined average daily trading volume in the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq Stock Market in the first four months of 2011 fell 15% from 2010, to an average of 6.3 billion shares a day. Trading activities declined throughout 2011, with April's daily average of 5.8 billion shares marking the lowest month since May 2008. Sharp movements in stock prices, which were frequent during the period from 2008 to the first half of 2010, were in a decline in the Chicago Board Options Exchange volatility index, the VIX, which fell to its lowest level in April 2011 since July 2007.[93]

These volumes of trading activity in 2011, to some degree, were regarded as more natural levels than during the financial crisis and its aftermath. Some argued that those lofty levels of trading activity were never an accurate picture of demand among investors. It was a reflection of computer-driven traders passing securities back and forth between day-trading hedge funds. The flash crash exposed this phantom liquidity. In 2011 high-frequency trading firms became increasingly active in markets like futures and currencies, where volatility remains high.[93]

In 2011 trades by high-frequency traders accounted for 28% of the total volume in the futures markets, which included currencies and commodities, an increase from 22% in 2009. However, the growth of computerized and high-frequency trading in commodities and currencies coincided with a series of "flash crashes" in those markets. The role of human market makers, who match buyers and sellers and provide liquidity to the market, was more and more played by computer programs. If those program traders pulled back from the market, then big "buy" or "sell" orders could have led to sudden, big swings. It would have increased the probability of surprise distortions, as in the equity markets, according to a professional investor.[citation needed] In February 2011, the sugar market took a dive of 6% in just one second. On March 1, 2011, cocoa futures prices dropped 13% in less than a minute on the Intercontinental Exchange. Cocoa plunged $450 to a low of $3,217 a metric ton before rebounding quickly. The U.S. dollar tumbled against the yen on March 16, 2011, falling 5% in minutes, one of its biggest moves ever. According to a former cocoa trader: "The electronic platform is too fast; it doesn't slow things down like humans would."[91]

In July 2012, the SEC launched an initiative to create a new market surveillance tool known as the Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT).[94] By April 2015, despite support for the CAT from SEC Chair Mary Jo White and members of Congress, work to finish the project continued to face delays.[95]

In media [ edit ]

Books [ edit ]

Film [ edit ]

Flash Crash (Announced) [98]

(Announced) Bloomberg Quicktake: The Wild $50M Ride of the Flash Crash Trader[99]. Hey look, they caught the guy who caused the flash crash of 2010! His name is Navinder Singh Sarao, and he lives in London and in 2009 he asked someone to help him build a spoofing robot:

Sarao was trading E-mini S&P 500 futures contracts, but he wanted a more convenient way to not trade them, so he e-mailed his FCM (futures commission merchant, i.e. broker) for help automating that. The idea is that he would put in a big order to sell a whole bunch of futures at a price a few ticks higher than the best offer. So probably he wouldn't sell any futures, since he wasn't offering the best price. But he had to keep constantly updating his orders to keep them a few ticks higher than the best offer, to make sure that he didn't accidentally sell any futures as the market moved. And that's a bit of a pain, so he programmed an algorithm to do it for him. Though he also seems to have done similar things manually, to support the algorithm's efforts, or to stave off boredom while the algorithm did its thing.. Kaja Whitehouse

USA TODAY

The arrest of a London trader who allegedly helped cause the 2010 Flash Crash isn't boosting investors' confidence. It's spooking them.

"If this one random guy could impact billions of market value in seconds or milliseconds, what's going on?" billionaire entrepreneur Mark Cuban said in an interview.

"If a guy in his underwear can manipulate markets, anybody can. The optics look really, really bad," said Cuban, who owns the Dallas Mavericks NBA basketball team.

Investors from Wall Street to Main Street are expressing bewildered concern over Navinder Singh Sarao's alleged role in the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010, which caused the Dow Jones industrial Average to plunge nearly 600 points in five minutes.

The drop erased hundreds of billions in market value before the Dow inexplicably recovered minutes later. It left investors shell-shocked and sent regulators scrambling for ways to prevent such a dramatic plummet from happening again.

Sarao was arrested in London on Tuesday and said in court Wednesday that he opposed extradition to the USA to face charges.

Joe Saluzzi, co-founder of Themis Trading, which executes trades for large investors, called the details surrounding Sarao's arrest a "confidence-shattering event."

He questions whether other traders may be engaged in market-moving activities, and why it took regulators so long to catch on.

"I would like to hear from the (regulators) why did it go on for five years? And can they tell us confidently that there's no one else doing this currently?" Saluzzi said.

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange, or CME Group, questioned Sarao numerous times about his trading in 2010, only to be brushed off, according to the Justice Department's criminal complaint against Sarao, unsealed Tuesday.

In March 2010, a few months before the crash, Sarao allegedly asked CME whether its questions about his trading meant CME was ready to go after "mass manipulation" by high-frequency traders, according to the DOJ.

In a statement, CME said it is reviewing the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's claim, also released Tuesday, that Sarao was partially responsible for the crash.

"Following the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010, together with other regulators, we did a thorough analysis of all activity in our markets during the Flash Crash, and concluded — along with regulators — that the Flash Crash was not caused by the futures market," CME Group said in a statement. "If new information has come to light, we look forward to reviewing it with the (CFTC)," the statement said.

Sarao's alleged activities went from 2009 through this year and earned him an estimated $40 million in profits, said Aitan Goelman, head of enforcement at the CFTC. Authorities charge he manipulated a popular stock market futures index for his gain by placing large contract orders and quickly canceling them before they were executed.

Adding to concerns, the CFTC was alerted to Sarao's alleged misdeeds by a whistle-blower, who has not been identified, according to Shayne Stevenson, who represents the whistle-blower through Hagens Berman law firm in Seattle. Stevenson said his client brought "high-quality information" about "market manipulation" to the CFTC, which alerted the DOJ.

Stevenson declined to specify when his client went to the CFTC with the information.

One investor says the episode reminds him of the Bernard Madoff fraud case. Madoff, a securities broker, ran a Ponzi scheme that stole billions of dollars from investors. Regulators didn't catch on for years despite warnings, and the scheme finally fell apart in 2008 with Madoff's arrest.

"This reminds me of the Madoff scandal in that it took a private investigator to figure out what happened," said Stanley Haar, a commodities trader with Haar Capital. "Trading those huge volumes, this guy should have been caught within a week," Haar said of Saraoo.. At about 2:30pm on May 6, 2010, an asset management firm began executing a series of orders on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Located in Overland Park, Kansas, Waddell & Reed was (and is) one of the oldest mutual fund companies in America. It followed a strategy based on fundamental analysis—Wall Street code for old-fashioned investing. That afternoon, it wanted to sell 75,000 futures contracts on the S&P 500, a major market index, before the market closed at 4 p.m. The order was large but basically unremarkable, and Waddell & Reed had been executing similar trades for decades.

But this time something was different. Within 20 minutes of Waddell & Reed’s initial order, S&P 500 futures had declined 5 percent, and individual equity prices began to oscillate wildly. The price of the consulting firm Accenture declined from roughly $30 to $0.01 in seven seconds. Consumer goods giant Procter and Gamble dropped from around $60 to $39. Shares of Apple tumbled 20 percent from their pre-crash price of approximately $250, and also traded at nearly $100,000 per share (trades which were later annulled by the exchange). The dramatic futures move and the massive and sudden dislocation in the equities markets on that day came to be known as the Flash Crash.

How did the Flash Crash happen? The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) arrived at one explanation in their official joint report, published in September of 2010. According to the report, many of the firms that bought the initial batch of futures from Waddell & Reed used automated trading software. Each purchase introduced additional market exposure and risk, prompting these trading programs to hedge their own risk by selling these same futures. Other automated traders took the other side of these trades, then also sought to offload their risk in the market. Each trade that Waddell & Reed made therefore caused multiple trades in response. In addition, Waddell & Reed had instructed their own trading program to trade no more than 9 percent of the total volume of the futures contracts traded at any given time, so that their algorithm didn’t trade too aggressively. But the algorithm wasn’t given any restrictions on price, or the time it should take to finish its order. It began to ramp up its own volumes exponentially in response to the activity that it itself had initiated, all the while maintaining its 9 percent volume cap. As the firms buying from Waddell & Reed accumulated risk, they began to require more incentive to continue buying futures. Prices began to fall. And since the different firms that were trading with Waddell & Reed’s orders also were generally using similar algorithms, their behavior became strongly correlated, pushing the markets in the same direction: down.

TIMOTHY A. CLARY/AFP/Getty Images

But then, almost as quickly as it had started, the crisis resolved itself. During the next few minutes, following an automatically triggered pause in futures trading, firms began to see the depressed market as a buying opportunity. Trading systems were reactivated and liquidity was restored. The market recovered to almost to its pre-crash level.

Some commentators remain skeptical of the SEC-CFTC’s official explanation. For example, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, where the trades were executed, argued that a trade of the sort that Waddell & Reed had executed was too small, or too common, to explain such an extreme and unusual event. Firms like Waddell & Reed may make dozens, even hundreds, of similar trades without a hitch every year. Then just this past Tuesday, on April 21, a United Kingdom-based futures trader called Navinder Singh Sarao was arrested on wire fraud and market manipulation charges. He stands accused of placing large sell orders in S&P 500 futures without ever intending to have those orders fulfilled. Instead, regulators and prosecutors allege, his orders were intended to trick the market by increasing sell pressure on the futures. Regulators allege that the trick worked, making Sarao millions of dollars in profit. Furthermore, regulators have taken pains to emphasize that he employed this strategy on the day of the Flash Crash. His activity caused a sudden loss of liquidity and “directly contributed to the … price crash,” according to the CFTC’s complaint.

Like a nuclear power plant, modern markets are both interactively complex and tightly coupled.

So which explanation captures the dynamics that led to the crash? Could an ordinary order in the futures market or a lone market manipulator really cause the crash? The simple answer is that this is the wrong question to ask. From the perspective of the joint report and the enforcement action, the Flash Crash was a fluke, an idiosyncratic event caused by an unexpected glitch in the markets. But it was far from being a fluke. Instead, the Flash Crash reveals that we need a fundamentally different understanding of how modern financial markets work. We believe that it shows us that markets are governed by the same principle as earthquakes and avalanches: self-organized criticality.

A critical phenomenon is one in which changes in one part of a system reverberate throughout the rest of the system, allowing a small perturbation to trigger an extreme effect. In many systems, critical phenomena only occur under special circumstances, within a narrow range of parameters. In other cases, though, a system can exhibit “self-organized criticality.” This means the system can spontaneously depart from mild and predictable behavior and evolve to a state where critical phenomena begin to occur. It combines long stretches of predictability with bursts of radically different, unpredictable behavior caused by prosaic triggers—much like the market.

One well-studied example is the sandpile. Imagine sitting on the beach, slowly dropping grains of sand onto a pile. A given grain will land somewhere near the top of the pile and stay there. Gradually these grains will form a cone shape. The mathematics of how this sort of cone grows are well understood, and we can develop models that very accurately capture how sand piles grow. But sometimes something else happens, as Jordan Ellenberg describes in his Nautilus essay. A grain of sand will land on the pile, and then, instead of staying put, it will produce a chain reaction. It will hit a neighboring grain in just the right way to dislodge it; this second grain will hit another, again dislodging it; and so on, until there is a little avalanche. There is nothing special about the grain of sand that starts the collapse—it need not be bigger, or heavier, or fall in a different way from the hundreds of grains that just stay where they land. But it produces an outsized effect.

To see how small changes can reverberate through real-world systems, let’s turn to another disaster, the 1979 meltdown at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant. Yale sociologist Charles Perrow has studied the interactions that cause complex systems to fail catastrophically. He categorizes these systems along two dimensions: interactive complexity and coupling. Systems with a high degree of interactive complexity are prone to unplanned and unexpected interactions that are difficult to comprehend in real time. If such systems are also tightly coupled, it is difficult to recover from a failure, because it propagates quickly. The dynamics of such failures often mimic the evolution of systems into critical states.

Flashes of wildness are every bit as much a part of market dynamics as long stretches of predictability.

What started as an isolated pump shutdown at Three Mile Island—a relatively prosaic trigger event—cascaded into a series of failures that interacted in unexpected ways, including a stuck valve in an automatic safety system and a misleading control room indicator. All of these failures occurred without the system being “tuned” to any specific state: They were self-organized. The inherent impossibility of directly observing the dynamics of a nuclear reactor made it difficult for operators to diagnose the situation. And the underlying, tightly coupled nature of nuclear power provided an opportunity for the trigger event to be amplified. All this led to outsized consequences: a partial core meltdown.

Didier Sornette at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology has argued that market crashes are another example of self-organized criticality. Through Perrow’s framework, we see how the underlying structure of the market might lead to self-organized criticality. Like a nuclear power plant, modern markets are both interactively complex and tightly coupled. Their complexity comes, in part, from the layers of interacting technologies used by stock and futures exchanges, market data providers, and even the participants themselves, whose computers connect to exchanges to trade with proprietary and often closely-guarded algorithmic strategies. Likewise, markets are tightly coupled by the fact that market participants use models that rely on similar inputs and assumptions. Many firms also use the same class of safety checks to stop trading when things go wrong, which, as we saw with the Flash Crash, can amplify problems. The speed of trading in highly computerized markets also means that problems can evolve quickly, faster than operators can respond.

The analogy to sandpiles might also give us a hint about the origins of the Flash Crash. Just as any grain of sand can serve to start an avalanche, so could many factors have started the Flash Crash. In a self-organized critical system, the state of the system, rather than the precise characteristics of the trigger, is what matters the most.

Neither the Waddell & Reed sale, nor any single actor’s market manipulation, explain the Flash Crash. Indeed, if it were possible that the market could move 5 percent from a large order or the simple manipulations of one trader, we would expect such instances of extreme volatility to be much more frequent. Just as the sandpile can reach a state in which critical phenomena can occur organically, without any special preparation, so can the markets. This special sort of state happens rarely, which is why most of the time the market absorbs exactly the kinds of activities that have been cited as the cause of the crash. The important thing is that such states can happen, both in mathematical models of sandpile collapses and in real-world systems. And it is under these circumstances, when a system has evolved into a critical state on its own, that ordinary events can lead to something as extreme as the events of May 6, 2010.

This is why asking whether the Waddell & Reed sale, or the behavior of a manipulative trader, really caused the crash is a mistake. The disparate “causal” explanations of the crash can’t be reconciled with each other for a simple reason: They aren’t in conflict. The Flash Crash was an emergent phenomenon. Just as any grain of sand might cause the sandpile to collapse, and as Three Mile Island’s meltdown could be attributed to a failed pump, stuck valve, or operator error, the trigger for the Flash Crash could have been related to Sarao, Waddell & Reed, or something else entirely. The true roots were in the complexity of the system itself. The market was ripe for such an event.

In the years since the Flash Crash, the SEC has implemented measures to reduce tight coupling in the markets, and exchanges now pause trading if there are drastic price moves in individual securities. These measures help, but are they enough? The fundamental interactive complexity of the market and the unpredictable and difficult-to-observe interactions between software components, trading models, and market participants remain in place. Though we have avoided a repeat of the Flash Crash, similar events continue to occur. In May 2012, NASDAQ struggled to recover from a set of software glitches that delayed the Facebook IPO and resulted in hundreds of million dollars in alleged losses. The following August, Knight Capital, a major trading firm, dissolved after a software “glitch” caused them to lose almost $10 million dollars per minute for 45 minutes.

These flashes of wildness are every bit as much a part of market dynamics as long stretches of predictability. Focusing our attention on these long stretches of normal market behavior can be misleading, because they obscure the events that create the most important changes. Instead, we need to recognize that it is only by studying events like the Flash Crash that we can come to see how complex market forces interact with one another. The dominos are still there, self-organized by market dynamics that we do not fully understand and cannot directly observe or control. And we have no idea when they will topple next.

Chris Clearfield is a principal at System Logic, a boutique consulting firm focused on risk management in complex systems. James Owen Weatherall is an associate professor at the University of California, Irvine, and author of The Physics of Wall Street.. Five years ago, the global financial system was rocked by the “flash crash,” 15 minutes of chaos that shook the world’s biggest markets and prompted investors both big and small to question how such a vital part of the economy could be brought to its knees.

On Tuesday, United States prosecutors said that much of the blame for the event could be pinned on a single person: a 36-year-old man who had been boldly manipulating markets from his suburban rowhouse just a few minutes from Heathrow Airport outside London, where he was arrested.

Regulators said that their prosecution of the trader, Navinder Singh Sarao, demonstrated their aggressiveness in rooting out market manipulation. But news of the arrest, if anything, has raised anew concerns about how an individual could manage to exert such influence over the world’s financial markets. The case also played into worries that have swirled around the increasingly automated and complex financial markets, where regulators have struggled to keep up with nimble new participants like high-frequency trading firms that use sophisticated networks to make money in milliseconds via rapid-fire trades.

For the latest case, it took the authorities five years to track down a rogue actor making enormous trades. And, they were led to him only with the help of an outside whistle-blower.. . The great flash crash of 2010: What happened to the Dow Jones and what is Navinder Singh Sarao supposed to have done?

British trader Navinder Singh Sarao has been arrested, charged and is facing extradition to the United States over his role in the "flash crash". Sarao has appeared before Westminster Magistrates and has said he will contest this.

It started in the early afternoon of 6 May 2010, as panicked investors watched the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunge around nine per cent in a matter of seconds. And the most terrifying thing was nobody really knew why.

The Dow had recovered a large part of its losses by the time markets closed. However, the 1,000 point dive is still the index's second-largest point swing, and its biggest one-day intra-day decline ever.

Some stocks suffered huge price swings, with the share prices of two companies in particular – Procter & Gamble and 3M – falling 36 per cent and 18 per cent respectively.

So what happened on the day of the "flash crash"?

8.00am – Stock markets open slightly lower on ongoing concerns over the financial situation in Greece, as well as uncertainty emanating from elections in the UK, and the upcoming jobs report.



Stock markets open slightly lower on ongoing concerns over the financial situation in Greece, as well as uncertainty emanating from elections in the UK, and the upcoming jobs report. 2.00pm – The Dow drops 161 points, or 1.5 per cent.



– The Dow drops 161 points, or 1.5 per cent. 2.42pm – The Dow falls a further 3.9 per cent to 10,445.84 points.



– The Dow falls a further 3.9 per cent to 10,445.84 points. 2.47pm – The index suddenly sheds another 5.49 per cent in five minutes of trading, hitting 9,872.57, meaning it's now down 9.16 percent from the previous day’s close.



– The index suddenly sheds another 5.49 per cent in five minutes of trading, hitting 9,872.57, meaning it's now down 9.16 percent from the previous day’s close. 3.00pm – Stocks rise again, reducing its total decline to 4.26 per cent, or 463.05 points.



– Stocks rise again, reducing its total decline to 4.26 per cent, or 463.05 points. 4.30pm – The index ends the day at 10,520.32, 3.2 percent from the prior day’s close.

The United States' Securities and Exchange Commission and its Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) subsequently issued a joint report on the "flash crash" of May 6th.

The report blamed the crash on a large sell order for "e-mini" futures on the S&P 500 by a mutual fund. These are a financial product which reflect investor confidence for the future performance of the S&P 500.

It said the order placed that day was so large it overwhelmed the market, as there weren't enough available buyers, and consequently liquidity evaporated, causing prices to plummet.

How does Navinder Singh Sarao fit into this?

The CFTC has alleged Sarao's financial trading company had been entering into and subsequently withdrawing from thousands of orders in a bid to depress the price of the "e-mini" futures on the S&P 500. When the prices fell he swooped, buying them up, and profiting accordingly.

They say his behaviour contributed to the fact that, when a huge trade was executed over in the United States, there wasn't enough liquidity, and the market was unable to handle it.. Nearly five years after the so-called “flash crash”—when the market dropped hundreds of points in the span of a few minutes on May 6, 2010—authorities have arrested a trader that they believe helped cause the swoon.

But the alleged culprit, a U.K.-based futures trader named Navinder Singh Sarao, didn’t actually make a whole lot of money off the flash crash, according to the U.S. Justice Department’s criminal complaint against Sarao.

The complaint, which accuses Sarao of manipulating market prices by fraudulently trading S&P 500 futures contracts, says that he netted $879,018 in profits on the day of the crash.

But that was a relatively small haul compared to Sarao’s gains on other days where he used the same strategy, according to the indictment. For example, more than a year later, on August 4, 2011, Sarao allegedly reaped more than $4 million by manipulating the prices of the same kinds of contracts.

Sarao’s strategy, described in the 35-page complaint by FBI special agent Gregory Laberta, involved placing large orders for electronic S&P 500 futures contracts known as “E-minis,” only to cancel them before the orders were actually executed. The practice is known as “spoofing” and it is illegal.

Using automated trading software, Sarao allegedly placed repeat bogus orders to sell huge blocks of E-minis, artificially pushing the market price of the futures contracts down. Once the price dropped, he would then execute real trades to buy the contracts at the lower price, while simultaneously cancelling his original sell orders. Next, he would turn around and use spoofing to drive the price of the contracts back up, actually selling some at the higher price while cancelling the rest of his fake orders.

Between 2010 and 2014, Sarao made a total of roughly $40 million using that strategy—and he was still actively spoofing through at least the first week of April, according to a separate civil complaint against Sarao by the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission.

But if Sarao’s actions really did lead to the flash crash, it’s unclear why they only caused a single one—especially when that wasn’t even his biggest windfall amid a long-running scheme.

Indeed, Sarao’s conduct on the day of the flash crash actually seems pretty ordinary for him, by the FBI agent’s account. Over a period of two hours starting in the early afternoon New York time, when the Dow was down by more than 300 points, Sarao allegedly traded more than 62,000 E-mini contracts worth $3.5 billion. But for him that was nothing: The previous day he’d traded E-minis worth more than double that amount (or $7.6 billion); the day after the flash crash, he traded some $8.7 billion of them. (According to an email Sarao sent in 2012, cited in the complaint, the trader bragged that he “made the majority of [his] net worth” in “no more than 20 days trading.”)

Still, the day of the flash crash, Sarao’s spoof orders somehow created an “extreme order book imbalance” on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the primary place where E-minis are traded. During the two-hour period just before the flash crash, as much as 29% (or nearly a third) of the sell orders on the exchange were coming from Sarao, according to the criminal complaint. At that time, there was “little liquidity left in the market,” as there were more than twice as many sell orders as buy orders for E-mini futures contracts, the complaint says.

And that’s when the market went into free fall—triggering the “flash crash” at about 2:45 p.m. As investors (or their algorithmic trading programs) noticed what appeared to be a major fire sale of E-minis, the sell-off “spilled into equities markets” as traders dumped stock: The Dow shed another 600 points in a matter of five minutes, and was briefly down by 1000 points.

And if E-minis trading had caused the crash, all it took was a quick timeout to stop the chaos: the CME halted trading in E-minis for five seconds, and the market mostly recovered by 3 p.m.

The very next day, it was rinse-and-repeat for Sarao, who kept up his spoofing routine as though nothing ever happened, according to the complaint. So why hasn’t there been another flash crash since (other than the brief 2013 swoon following a hoax tweet about a White House attack)?

One theory is that it wasn’t just Sarao, but a confluence of spoof traders or price manipulators who caused the market imbalance; Sarao is simply the only one—or perhaps just the first—to get caught. It just may take another flash crash for government regulators to find the others.

Watch more business news from Fortune:

. The flash crash has proven one of the most mysterious market events in recent history. Many observers still believe the event hasn't been fully investigated. Their view is fueled in part by new allegations that a London trader's manipulative trading helped set up the market for a crash that day.

Scroll down to see how the day unfolded.. On May 6, 2010, at approximately 2:32 pm EST, all three U.S. stock indices–The Dow Jones Industrial Index, S&P 500, and the Nasdaq Composite–underwent a massive plunge and a partial rebound over a 36-minute period.

In just a matter of minutes, the Dow Jones logged its second largest intraday drop, crashing 998.5 points (9%) before rapidly bouncing back. Short of any fundamental trigger, the crash seemed to have been caused by nothing of economic substance; an anomaly appearing out of nowhere; a trillion-dollar “Black Swan” event, to which there seemed to have been no trace of an explanation.

If you were tuned into CNBC’s live broadcast, you might have seen this verbal exchange which at that exact moment was focused on P&G’s (Procter & Gamble) 37% stock plummet (transcript via Wikipedia):

(“Let’s take a look at P&G. Alright, this is going to say everything. P&G is now down 25%.”)

Jim Cramer: Oh, well, that’s true, if that stock is there you just go and buy it. That—it can’t be there. [pointing finger] That is not a real price. Oh well, just go buy Procter. Just go buy Procter & Gamble, they reported a decent quarter, just go buy it.

(“Is there a hedge fund that is liquidating?”)

Jim Cramer: Eh… Who cares?! I’ll pay… a 49 + 1/4 bid for 50,000 Procter, if I were at my hedge fund. I mean, this is ridi… this is a good opportunity. When I walked down here it was at 61—when I walked down here it was at 61, I’m not that interested in it. It’s at 47, well that’s a different security entirely, so what you have to do, though, you have to use limit orders, because Procter just jumped seven points because I said I liked it at 49.

So, what happened on that day?

A lot of theories were presented as industry professionals, regulators, and academics strove to make sense of it all.

One popular theory was the “fat-finger error,” that a trader inadvertently sold a large position of stocks such as that of Procter & Gamble. This type of error can be likened to someone who accidentally types in too many digits when placing a trade, turning an order of, say, a hundred thousand into a few millions or even more.

Another theory was that multiple automated trading systems converged, placing sell orders at the same time, causing the markets to fall, in turn prompting even more asset liquidations. This is a negative feedback loop in which sell orders prompt a continuous cycle of even more selling which ultimately results in a massive avalanche of liquidations.

These were just two of several other theories put forward over the next few years. All of them equally valid; none of them certain.

Finding the Culprit Five Years Later

It wasn’t until 2015 that the mystery behind the first-ever flash crash was finally solved. It had been discovered that a London-based trader by the name of Navinder Singh Sarao was using an algorithmic program to generate massive sell orders on the E-mini S&P futures to manipulate prices downward by getting other people to sell (as they would see his large orders). As Sarao never intended on selling any contracts, he would wait for prices to move down, cancel his sell orders, buy E-mini S&P futures at the lower market prices and then sell them back once prices moved up again upon sellers realizing that the order flow was no longer skewed toward the downside. In short, Sarao was “spoofing.”

Sarao was arrested in April 2015 with charges issued by the U.S. Department of Justice. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed a separate civil suit against him. Later that year, he was eventually extradited to the U.S. facing 22 charges of fraud and market manipulation.

Sarao’s alleged profit during the flash crash: $40 million. And to think, he managed to pull this off all from the comforts of his own home.

It was also discovered that he had been inconspicuously spoofing the markets for five years. The thing is, if you cause the market to temporarily lose $1 trillion in value, it’s hard to go unnoticed and thus, ends Sarao’s brilliant, brief, and painfully unrewarding spoofing career.

There is a substantial risk of loss in trading futures, options and forex. Past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results.. 9 Pages Posted: 2 Nov 2018 Last revised: 28 Dec 2018

Date Written: December 26, 2018

Abstract

Using intraday data on individual stocks included in the S&P 500 index, we present evidence of herd formation over the duration and aftermath of the Flash Crash on May 6, 2010, while no evidence of herding is observed preceding the event. The findings establish a clear link between herding among market participants and flash events that can drive sudden price fluctuations and underscore the importance of monitoring herd activity, particularly in the case of automated markets.. . It was 6 May 2010. In the UK it was general election day, in the US,Wall Street was gripped by mounting anxiety about the Greek debt crisis. The euro was falling against the dollar and the yen, but despite the turbulent start to the trading day, no one had expected the near 1,000-point dive in share prices.

In a matter of minutes the Dow Jones index lost almost 9% of its value – in a sequences of events that quickly became known as “flash crash” . Hundreds of billions of dollars were wiped off the share prices of household name companies like Proctor & Gamble and General Electric. But the carnage , which took place at a speed never before witnessed, did not last long. The market rapidly regained its composure and eventually closed 3% lower.

There was a frenzy of speculation about what might have caused the rout, with explanations ranging from fat fingered trading to a cyberattack. But within days, officials in the US were blaming big bets by a trader on Chicago’s derivatives exchange. By the end of September, an official report by the two main US regulators pointed to a $4.1bn (£2.7bn) sell order instigated by a US mutual fund, said to be Waddell & Reed.

At 2.32 pm, the mutual fund had used an automated algorithm trading strategy to sell contracts known as e-minis. It was the largest change in the daily position of any investor so far that year and sparked selling by other traders, including high frequency traders.

The official report by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission outlined a “hot potato” effect as the HFTs started and buying and then reselling the e-mini contracts. Some orders were executed at “irrational prices” as low as one penny or as high as $100,000 before the share prices returned to their pre-crash levels by 3pm. In just 20 minutes, 2bn shares worth $56bn had changed hands.. For free real time breaking news alerts sent straight to your inbox sign up to our breaking news emails Sign up to our free breaking news emails Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the

Breaking News email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

What was the Flash Crash?

One of the most scary and bizarre days in Wall Street’s history. On 6 May 2010, the Dow Jones Industrial Average Index plummeted by 6 per cent in a matter of minutes - an unprecedented single-day fall. The shares of some enormous American companies such as General Electric and Accenture were virtually worthless at one point and $1 trillion in the paper value of shares was suddenly gone. And then the Dow promptly shot back up again, recovering almost all of the earlier losses leaving traders and regulators traumatised and baffled.

How could one trader be responsible for such mayhem?

He wasn’t really. Navinder Singh Sarao stands accused by the US financial regulators of illegally manipulating the Chicago Mercantile Exchange futures market in equities to turn a private profit. The wording of the US Department of Justice charge sheet is that Sarao’s activities on 6 May “contributed” to the Flash Crash by creating an “extreme order book imbalance” in the futures market.

A court sketch shows Navinder Singh Sarao opposing his extradition to the US at Westminster magistrates’ court

What exactly is Mr Sarao accused of doing?

The main manipulation technique outlined by the US authorities is so-called “layering” or “spoofing”. This means a trader places a large number of fraudulent electronic orders to sell futures contracts. These orders are visible to other traders and indicate lots of market desire to sell. That prompts them to drive the price of a contract down. The accusation is that Mr Sarao then cancelled the orders prompting prices to bounce back up. He allegedly managed to profit from the price swing by buying contracts when they were artificially low and selling them back when the price snapped back. It’s illegal because the markets rules say that orders have to be made in good faith and with the intention to complete.

How did this destabilise the main stock market?

Prices in the futures markets influence prices in the main market. The US authorities seem to be claiming that Mr Sarao’s futures manipulation helped to create a kind of financial avalanche on the day of the Flash Crash which spilled over from the futures market and engulfed the main market.

So was he one of those “high-frequency traders” we hear about?

Not really. Those traders – written about by Michael Lewis in his recent book “Flash Boys” are characterised by their use of a vast amount of computing power and privileged access to electronic stock market infrastructure. This combination gives them the ability to react to (and thus profit) from price movements more quickly than others, leading to accusations that the market is effective skewed in their favour. The accounts of Mr Sarao’s one-man company show that the value of his computer technology in 2010 was just £1,400. Mr Sarao also described himself to the UK financial regulators as an “old-school point and click” trader who had “always been good with reflexes and doing things quick”. Ironically, his profits may well have come at the expense of sophisticated high-frequency traders because they will likely have been the ones selling quickly when fraudulent orders come through.

Did he make much money from his activities?

According to the US regulators he did. They estimate he made around $879,000 on the day of the Flash Crash. They also think he creamed off $40m from his manipulation of markets over the next four years (although it is unclear where these proceeds have gone). And incidentally, the fact Mr Sarao’s manipulation was allegedly going on for so long is one of the reasons many in the financial markets are sceptical of the idea that his activities played any significant role in the 2010 crash. If his futures market manipulation was the driver of the chaos on 6 May one would have expected many more massive market crashes in subsequent years.

Is this the only sort of market manipulation that takes place?

Far from it. Traders, in private, outline a host of others techniques of questionably legality. One is “quote stuffing”, which effectively creates uncertainty in markets for other traders by making a large numbers of orders and issuing a stream of updates. Another is “momentum ignition” which is a series of orders intended to start or accelerate a trend favourable to a particular trader. There are also “ping orders”, tiny buy or sell requests which are intended to ascertain the level of concealed orders in a market.. 



(You can now subscribe to our

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel

From a modest stucco house in suburban west London, where jetliners roar overhead on their approach to Heathrow Airport, a small-time trader was about to play a hand in one of the most harrowing moments in Wall Street history.Navinder Singh Sarao was as anonymous as they come—little more than a day trader by the standards of the Street.But on that spring day five years ago, US authorities now say, Sarao helped send the Dow Jones Industrial Average on the wild, 1,000-point ride that the world came to know as the flash crash. By regulators’ account, he was responsible for a stunning one out of five sell orders during the frenzy. On Tuesday, he was arrested by Scotland Yard and charged in the US with 22 criminal counts, including fraud and market manipulation. The news left many grasping for answers. Sarao, 36, has no record of having worked at a major financial firm in the US or the UK. At the time of the flash crash, Sarao was renting space from a proprietary trading firm in the City of London and clearing his transactions through MF Global Holdings, the now-defunct firm headed by Jon Corzine, said a person with knowledge of the matter. One of Sarao’s neighbors in Hounslow, 11 miles from central London, said what neighbours so often say: He was quiet, kept to himself, never caused trouble.That picture, according to US authorities, belies a years-long history of lightning-quick computer trading that netted Sarao $40 million in illicit profits. Sarao couldn’t be reached for comment on Tuesday and US authorities said they didn’t know whether he had retained a lawyer. Sarao didn’t cause the flash crash single-handedly, authorities say. Nonetheless, Tuesday’s developments fly in the face of the prevailing narratives of what happened. Regulators initially concluded that a mutual fund company— said to be Waddell & Reed Financial of Overland Park, Kansas — played a leading role. Many in the industry countered that a confluence of several forces, including high-frequency trading, was probably behind the crash.By all accounts, the flash crash was more than a mere technical glitch. It raised fundamental questions about how vulnerable today’s complex financial markets are to the high-speed, computer-driven trading that has come to dominate the marketplace.Little is known about Sarao and his trades, beyond what is contained in a complaint filed by the US Department of Justice. A related civil suit filed by the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission provides a few additional glimpses into his supposed activities. The case stemmed from a whistle-blower who brought “powerful, original analysis” to the CFTC’s attention, said Shayne Stevenson, a Seattle lawyer representing the whistle-blower.According to US authorities, Sarao spent the past six years thumbing his nose at regulators while using software designed to manipulate markets. In addition to fraud and manipulation, he was charged with spoofing — an illegal practice that involves placing orders with the intent to cancel before they’re executed. In May 2010, Sarao’s actions created imbalances in the derivatives market that then spilled over to stock markets, exacerbating the flash crash, according to the CFTC.“We do believe and intend to show that his conduct was at least significantly responsible for the order imbalance that in turn was one of the conditions that led to the flash crash,” Aitan Goelman, the CFTC’s director of enforcement, told reporters on Tuesday.When he was trading, Sarao kept to himself. His computer screen almost always flashed futures data tied to the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index and his interactions were typically limited to workers installing new trading algorithms, said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.When he started his allegedly manipulative trading in 2009, Sarao used off-theshelf software that he later asked to be modified so he could rapidly place and cancel orders automatically. At one point, he asked the software developer for the code, explaining that he wanted to play around with creating new versions, according to regulators.In the year leading up to the flash crash, Sarao popped up on regulators’ radar. Exchanges in the US and Europe saw he was routinely placing and then quickly cancelling large volumes of orders, according to an FBI affidavit unsealed Tuesday by a federal court in Illinois.The CME Group, which operates an exchange for one of the most common derivatives tied to the S&P 500, contacted Sarao about his trades after concluding that some of his activities appeared to have had a significant impact on opening prices. Sarao explained some of his conduct to the CME in a March 2010 email, as “just showing a friend of mine what occurs on the bid side of the market almost 24 hours a day, by the high-frequency geeks.”He then questioned whether CME’s actions regarding his activity meant “the mass manipulation of high frequency nerds is going to end,” according to the FBI affidavit.On May 6, 2010, the day of the flash crash, CME sent Sarao another message. All orders to CME’s electronic exchange were to be “entered in good faith for the purpose of executing bona fide transactions,” CME said, according to the FBI affidavit.That same day, Sarao and his firm, Nav Sarao Futures Limited, used “layering” and “spoofing” algorithms to trade thousands of futures S&P 500 E-mini contracts. The orders amounted to about $200 million worth of bets that the market would fall, a trade that represented between 20 per cent and 29 per cent of all sell orders at the time. The orders were then replaced or modified 19,000 times before being cancelled in the afternoon.The imbalance on the exchange due to Sarao’s orders “contributed to market conditions” that saw the derivatives contract plunge and later also the stock market, according to the CFTC.The crash spooked investors, became front page news around the world and left regulators wondering how it happened. About three weeks later, Sarao told his broker that he had just called the CME and told them to “kiss my ass,” the affidavit said. No one put an end to Sarao’s trading for another five years. Among the nearly two dozen charges, one is tied to trades from March 2014.US prosecutors will seek to extradite Sarao, who is scheduled to appear in a UK court on Wednesday, according to Peter Carr, a Justice Department spokesman. Wire fraud is punishable in the US by maximum prison term of 20 years, commodities fraud by a sentence of as long as 25 years and commodities manipulation and spoofing by terms of as long as 10 years or a $1-million fine.. May 6, 2015, marks the five-year anniversary of the so-called ‘flash crash’ on the New York Stock Exchange. That day, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted more than 1,000 points, before regaining much of its ground by the end of the day.

The causes of the flash crash are still debated, but certainly included a combination of civil unrest and market volatility sparked by the European debt crisis, plus high-frequency trading. Another key factor is now thought to be market manipulation by a single rogue trader in London, who was allegedly “spoofing” S&P futures (in particular, the S&P 500 E-mini contract). That trader, Navinder Sarao, 36, was charged last month in the U.K.

Similar cases have followed.

On May 5, 2015, in Manhattan federal court, the Commodities Futures Trading Commission, working with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, filed civil charges against two traders in the United Arab Emirates. They allegedly spoofed the gold and silver markets from February to April 2015.

University of Maryland law professor Michael Greenberger, a former director at the CFTC, says “embarrassment” over the 2010 flash crash revelations seem to be galvanizing securities regulators to identify and track down alleged market manipulators. But he says the Obama Administration’s prosecutorial approach isn’t helping, as it has favored civil over criminal charges in most securities-fraud cases since the financial crisis.

“The cleanest and clearest way to stop people from doing these things is the real possibility of ending up in jail,” says Greenberger. When traders and their firms face only civil charges, Greenberger continues, “they pay penalties. Penalties are a cost of doing business. Spending time in prison is the most effective deterrent to the fraudsters.”

Greenberger also believes part of the blame for lax enforcement against spoofing and other attempts to manipulate market prices lies with the equity and futures exchanges themselves. He charges that the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, for instance, has dueling incentives—to ensure market integrity, but also to generate profits from higher trading volume, which high-frequency trading provides. Greenberger also says members of Congress, acting to help financial firms that are also big campaign contributors, have not adequately funded federal securities regulators like the CFTC and SEC.

Karen Petrou, a banking analyst at Federal Financial Analytics in Washington, D.C., believes that since the flash crash in 2010, the problem of market manipulation by participants with sophisticated technology for super-fast online trading has only gotten worse—in U.S. markets and overseas. She cites recent examples in the past year, including flash crashes on the German and Swiss markets and in the U.S. bond market. Petrou attributes much of the problem to under-regulated high-frequency traders.

“In its algorithm, in a nanosecond, a liquidity or temporary market phenomenon will give the high-frequency trader a teeny-tiny advantage,” says Petrou. “And if you do that a lot, very, very fast, you can make a lot of money.”

All of that rapid-fire computer-driven and -executed trading increases volatility and systemic financial risk, she says—not just for investors, but also for big banks.

“We are seeing flash crashes in the equity, treasury, foreign exchange and bond markets,” says Petrou. “We should be very scared. I know regulators are. But they’re not acting.”

A multi-agency plan conceived after the 2010 flash crash to monitor and prevent attempts to manipulate the markets has so far been mired in technological complexity, corporate rivalry and regulatory delays.. In California, people fear the “big one” – an earthquake of such magnitude that it could wipe the state off the map. They look nervously at the intense seismic tremors from previous earthquakes and fear it is only a matter of time. The financial markets have an equivalent to these tremors: flash crashes are temporary market spikes that are a feature of modern automated trading. So far, they have passed quickly and normal business has resumed. Yet that may not be the pattern in future. The worry is that one day soon, a flash crash could bring the global economy to its knees.

Rewind to January 2, when Apple issued a profit warning, largely thanks to softer demand for Apple devices in China. The Australian dollar, used by traders as a proxy for the Chinese economy, suddenly tumbled 3.5%. Something similar happened with the Japanese yen in the opposite direction. By the end of the Asian trading session, these shifts had rebounded. Yet market watchers were in no doubt: another “flash crash” had just struck.

Flashes big and small

The first flash crash that made headlines infamously took place around 2.30pm to 3.00pm Eastern Standard Time on May 6, 2010. The Dow Jones Industrial Average suddenly tanked 10%, causing spectacular upheaval in the US futures and spot markets. A subsequent official report blamed automated trading, often known as algorithmic trading, for starving the market of willing buyers.

What saved the day was the triggering of a circuit breaker on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the world’s largest futures market. This stopped the market for just five seconds, but it was enough time for automated traders to discern that prices were artificially low. They duly sent manual purchases which cumulatively helped the markets to recover by driving up prices again.

Flash crashes have since become a more regular occurrence. There have been thousands of mini flash crashes, moving a market by a relatively small amount, but also more major incidents. The highlights are listed in the following table, including the crash of January 2, 2019. This doesn’t include the flash crash of December 5, 2018, which saw a sudden plunge in S&P 500 E-mini futures, the most traded futures contract in the world. In just three minutes after the day’s opening, these futures plunged 2.5%, only to rebound thanks to another circuit breaker.

So what is going on? Since around the turn of the century, financial firms have increasingly relied on algorithmic trading. It enables them to take advantage of the superhuman abilities of computers to process huge volumes of data at high speeds. Different operators use different strategies and time horizons, ranging from long-term investments by pension funds and insurance companies to short-term buying and selling by banks and brokers.

Problem predators

Most algorithmic trading is perfectly legitimate – indeed, it makes markets more efficient by increasing trading activity. It becomes problematic where it becomes predatory – manipulating other traders by giving a false impression of market demand.

Most predatory strategies involve posting then cancelling orders to buy or sell a security at a better price. Let’s say that a trading algorithm wants to sell 400 Microsoft shares at US$10 per share. The market order book, which records buyer demand, shows outstanding bids for only 50 shares at that price. This could be because, say, most trading is currently taking place at US$9.98.

To try and remedy this, our trading algorithm places a dummy bid for 450 Microsoft shares at US$10 each. Other would-be buyers are lured to place orders at the same price. This increases the number of share orders from, say, 500 to 900.

All this is happening in microseconds, so that none of this share demand has yet found a seller. Our algorithm knows exactly when its 450 order will be satisfied, and cancels just before. Instead, it instantaneously sells 400 shares at US$10 each to the buyers it attracted to the market. This is called spoofing. It was considered legitimate in the days of manual trading, but automated trading speeds have made it too effective. The same goes for other predatory strategies such as algorithm sniﬃng, quote stuﬃng, latency arbitrage and marking the close. Yet with more than half of US shares trading automated, for example, the worry is that there is still much predatory behaviour going on.

The reason these can cause or exacerbate flash crashes is that they can encourage herd behaviour – a rash of panic selling, say. This can prompt a particularly sharp price swing at a time when traders are staying out of the market because prices are too volatile – potentially spreading to other markets due to global interconnectedness, as traders begin to think that other prices must be wrong as well.

So far, flash crashes have coincided with a relatively calm bull market. But many now believe the tide has turned. The FTSE100, for example, registered its biggest fall in a decade in 2018. In a more depressed market, where there’s inevitably more volatility and traders are more downbeat, the worry is that flash crashes are more likely to get out of hand – possibly causing contagion around the world.

How we should respond

Circuit breakers have become much more widespread since 2010, but they don’t stop flash crashes. They merely pause trading – and if traders are feeling downbeat anyway, they may simply carry on panic selling (or buying) when the market reopens. Circuit breakers are also less helpful with securities traded in more than one market, such as currencies.

One alternative answer is more controlled exchanges which are friendlier to manual traders, such as the Investor Exchange (IEX) in the US. The IEX, established in 2012, offers simultaneous market access to all participants by imposing a 350 microseconds delay on trades. After only a few years of trading, the IEX accounts for about 2% of US securities trading. Faced with this new competitor, the New York Stock Exchange recently introduced a similar delay, but only for shares of small and mid-sized companies.

Elsewhere, the Tokyo Stock Exchange has implemented a system of trading checks to discourage manipulative order cancellations. The Italian exchange introduced a 0.02% levy on order cancellations beyond a particular threshold. France and Finland have launched similar systems.

Such interventions definitely reduce the risk of flash crashes. But even put together, only a relatively small proportion of the securities trade has been affected. The system as a whole remains gravely at risk.

With monetary policy tightening around the world; a trade war between the US and China; and stocks still generally expensive, it’s not surprising sentiment has been weakening. Having had two significant flash crashes in less than a month, the Bank of England’s recent warnings to “brace for future crashes” seem timely. Unless market regulators do more to mitigate these risks, there could be big trouble ahead.. . You, the human trader, may see an order to buy pop up on your screen half a second after it's published on the exchange. It may be big enough to move the market up - so you could make money if you could buy quickly.. About The Author

JP Buntinx is a FinTech and Bitcoin enthusiast living in Belgium. His passion for finance and technology made him one of the world's leading freelance Bitcoin writers, and he aims to achieve the same level of respect in the FinTech sector.. April 22, 2015 01:35 pm | Updated 01:35 pm IST - New York

An Indian-origin futures trader has been arrested in the U.K. and faces extradition to the U.S. for his alleged role in the May 2010 “flash crash” which wiped billions of dollars off the value of U.S. shares in minutes.

Navinder Singh Sarao (37) was arrested by British authorities yesterday at the request of the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. is requesting his extradition.

Mr. Sarao was charged in a federal criminal complaint in the Northern District of Illinois in February 2015.

The complaint charges him with one count of wire fraud, 10 counts of commodities fraud and commodities manipulation and one count of “spoofing”, a practice of bidding or offering with the intent to cancel the bid or offer before execution.

The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) also announced the unsealing of a parallel civil enforcement action against Mr. Sarao and his firm Nav Sarao Futures Limited.

The CFTC complaint charges him with unlawfully manipulating, attempting to manipulate, and spoofing with regard to the E-mini S&P 500 near month futures contract.

The E-mini S&P 500 is a stock market index futures contract based on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index and is one of the most popular and liquid equity index futures contracts in the world. The contract is traded only at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).

According to allegations in the criminal complaint, Mr. Sarao allegedly used an automated trading programme to manipulate the market for E-Mini S&P 500 futures contracts on the CME.

From April 2010 to present, he and his firm have profited over $40 million in total from the E-mini S&P trading.

Mr. Sarao’s alleged manipulation contributed to a major drop in the U.S. stock market on May 6, 2010, that came to be known as the “Flash Crash”. On that date, the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by approximately 600 points in a five-minute span, following a drop in the price of E-Minis.

According to the complaint, Mr. Sarao allegedly employed a “dynamic layering” scheme to affect the price of E-Minis.

By allegedly placing multiple, simultaneous, large-volume sell orders at different price points — a technique known as layering — Mr. Sarao created the appearance of substantial supply in the market.

As part of the scheme, he allegedly modified these orders frequently so that they remained close to the market price, and typically cancelled the orders without executing them. When prices fell as a result of this activity, Mr. Sarao allegedly sold futures contracts only to buy them back at a lower price.

“Today’s actions make clear that the CFTC, working with its partners on the criminal side, will find and prosecute manipulators of U.S. futures markets wherever they may be,” CFTC Director of Enforcement Aitan Goelman said.

In its ongoing litigation, the CFTC is seeking permanent injunctive relief, disgorgement, civil monetary penalties, trading suspensions or bans, and payment of costs and fees.

U.S. District Judge Andrea Wood has issued an order freezing and preserving assets under Mr. Sarao and his firm’s control. The court has scheduled a hearing for May 1, 2015, on the CFTC’s motion for a preliminary injunction.. Remember the flash crash? That was the 20 minutes on May 6, 2010 when the Dow lost almost 1,000 points before partially recovering. Most investors have forgotten about it. But not iShares, the Blackrock (BLK) subsidiary that accounts for 50% of trading in exchange-traded funds (ETFs). iShares' spokesperson Leland Clements told me on Wednesday afternoon that while his company doesn't know exactly what caused the flash crash, it has three proposals to keep it from happening again.



Three Possible Flash Crash Causes



I was amazed that Blackrock, which has a massive database of individual trades, was unable to pinpoint the cause of May's flash crash. But Clements said that iShares research reveals three likely culprits:



Fragmentation among stock exchanges . In 1987, when we had the crash that took 22.6% off the Dow, trading execution was much slower and more concentrated. Back then, 90% of stock trading occurred on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). In 2004, Regulation NMS changed all that -- encouraging the emergence of new electronic exchanges like BATS and DirectEdge. By 2010, a mere 15% to 17% of all NYSE trades were controlled by the NYSE (the new electronic exchanges controlled the rest).

Different ways of trading with exchanges that go into so-called slow mode . These new exchanges had different ways of handling big ups and downs in the market. The NYSE preserved a way to put people in charge -- and take control away from the computers -- in the event of a big percent change in a stock's price. Putting a person in charge of trading a stock was called slow-mode. Some of the new electronic exchanges had rules that caused them to stop trading with exchanges that went into slow mode. This led different exchanges to quote very different prices for a specific stock.

Inconsistent rules for handling bad price information. These different prices caused some market participants to lose confidence in the price information they were getting from the markets. And these participants' computers were programmed to shut down and stop trading in the event that they received bad or mis-information.

iShares believes that these factors, coupled with an already volatile market and concerns about Greece's financial stability, all contributed to the flash crash.



Benefits and Costs of Making Exchanges Competitive



What strikes me as most interesting about these findings is that they undermine a basic tenet of America's antitrust laws -- monopolies are bad and competition is good. While Reg NMS boosted competition among exchanges, that competition has had a mixed effect for consumers of those exchanges. It has lowered trading costs and accelerated trade execution down to a fraction of a second. But that competition has also traded off speed of execution for quality -- anyone who held Accenture (ACN) stock and watched it tumble from $40 to six cents during the flash crash would agree.



And then there's the problem I wrote about on DailyFinance in which some high frequency traders buy market trade data and use the location of their computers close to those of the exchange to place orders a fraction of a second before those market trades are about to be executed -- a form of trading in what I called insidery information.



How To Prevent the Next Flash Crash



So how does iShares suggest that the SEC change the so-called market structure to prevent the next flash crash? In general, it wants clear agreement on how different exchanges should work together when there's a market breakdown. Here are its three key proposals.



Agree on a standard definition of an erroneous trade . As noted above, not all participants agree on what constitutes an erroneous trade. Some would argue that if there is no demand for a stock at $40 and the only way to execute the sale is to cut the price to six cents, that's fine. Others would call that an erroneous trade. iShares believes that all exchanges must agree on a standard definition to stop the next flash crash. And they must then agree on how to cancel and communicate such an erroneous trade.

Create standard ways for exchanges to deal with an exchange that goes into slow mode . During the flash crash, some electronic exchanges refused to deal with an exchange that decided to go into slow mode. Instead, they went on to trade with other exchanges that continued to operate in regular mode. iShares believes that all exchanges need to have standard rules for ignoring what Clements called "a pool of liquidity," such as the NYSE or any other exchange that goes into slow mode.

Boost transparency of market makers' obligations and incentives. Finally,iShares wants the SEC to define the obligations of so-called Designated Market Makers (DMMs), such as the people on the NYSE who seek to create an orderly market in stocks like Accenture. Specifically, iShares wants to make it clear that DMMs have an obligation to keep a stock's price from collapsing and create incentives for them to step in and buy when there are no other buyers to keep the price from collapsing.

Clements said that iShares has been talking to many market participants about these proposals, and there seems to be general agreement about them. But he anticipates that different exchanges may resist changes that cut into profits.



In the meantime, the Securities and Exchange Commission is planning to pilot new market structure rules, see how well they work, and modify them based on the results of the pilot.



The hope is that any changes will preserve the benefits of competition while fixing the market's problems.. . Reuters

The search for causation over the May, 2010 “flash crash,” a one hour near 1,000 point loss and recovery on the Dow Jones Industrial Average, is a complex topic but one important to accurately document.

Advertisement

Such quantitative market mishaps only have the potential to cause more economic damage as society becomes increasingly dependent on technology and “artificial” intelligence.

Initially regulators publicly blamed a “fat finger” on the market sell-off that had no fundamental basis as a computer, not a finger, was involved. But a more nuanced and detailed report pointed to a single market participant for causation.

In support of the initial regulatory finding is a January 25 report challenging U.S. prosecutor conclusions, but does this report de-emphasize a key component?

Is analysis of what drives pricing — and a market participants providing two-sided liquidity that was simultaneously withdrawn during crisis — missing from meaningful analysis? This is not to diminish the report — it provided interesting insight on several levels.

Advertisement

It is to point out that any flash crash analysis might do well to consider how traders at the time were aware of certain market manipulation techniques relative to the underlying algorithmic market structure.

ValueWalk

Navinder Sarao was not solely responsible for the flash crash

A new report from two University of California and one Stanford University academics claim to know who should not be blamed. In a draft report titled “The Flash Crash: A New Deconstruction,” they say it is “unlikely that… Navinder Sarao’s spoofing orders, even if illegal, could have caused the flash crash.”

Sarao faces criminal charges in Chicago for intentionally manipulating markets using the “spoofing” tactic during the flash crash and on other occasions.

Spoofing is a trading technique that is designed to deceive the electronic market making system into moving markets in a beneficial direction to the trader. The technique has been a concern as it could damage market structure security, particularly the case in 2010 as the market making systems at the center of the flash crash were in the early stages of development.

Advertisement

This “spoofing” statement is perhaps most interesting not for claiming Sarao didn’t cause the flash crash – causation is likely a more complex and not singular in its conclusion and claims he was singularly responsible have been widely disputed.

But the report, in acknowledging the existence of Sarao’s “spoofing” orders, points to a commonly known tactic that has been the subject of criminal attention from authorities.

In part, spoofing works by intentionally creating order imbalances in both quotes — messages sent into the exchange that have been interpreted as indications of market balance — as well as actual sell orders designed to be executed immediately.

ValueWalk

Key market security issue at center of spoofing charges

Such spoofing has been successfully prosecuted. In the past, authorities would treat harshly anyone who engaged in behavior deemed damaging to overall market structure security, including manipulating market systems or abusing segregated funds laws.

Advertisement

While the report comes to Sarao’s defense in regards to his role as a “but for” cause of the flash crash — meaning if he was not involved, the crash would not have taken place — it might not tip the scales in court as it does not absolve Sarao of the more encompassing charges of market manipulation, an acknowledgement Sarao himself made in emails sent to his computer programmer designing the system.

Regarding flash crash causation, the report tends to side with the initial joint SEC-CFTC staff report on the topic that said “prevailing market conditions combined with the introduction of a large equity sell order implemented in a particularly dislocating manner” was the guilty party, pointing a finger at Kansas-city based mutual fund Waddell and Reed, the alleged “fat finger.”

The report noted a “disruptive” trading pattern but did not provide analysis of the Waddell and Reed market order that was said to have rested on the higher “ask” side of the bid-ask spread and was done over multiple smaller orders.

This was hotly debated among practitioners at the time, and a then CFTC source claimed it caused significant tension between the two regulators. The losing force in the battle wanted to raise questions regarding known methods of manipulating the market making system and disputed the notion of pointing blame at any one organization.

Advertisement

The report then hits a key market security topic: “If Sarao’s relatively small-scale trading could in fact generate the large-scale effects asserted by the government, modern equity market structures could be viewed as alarmingly fragile.”

Those fighting a battle inside regulators, generally defending market security issues, wanted full academic discussion of the issue to be public.

ValueWalk

Market making software had “eye” feature that detected anomolistic behavior and order imbalances, but this key point was never mentioned

The academic work spotlighted key insight regarding the flash crash in some significant ways, most particularly in focusing on the larger market environment and not just transactional data.

While this tends to support the thesis that multiple market forces were at work and blaming one person or group is narrow in focus, it also points to anomalistic behavior in the market environment. This is key point when one understands how the market making software generates bid and ask prices that are direct causation for market price moves.

Advertisement

Consider the anomalies: University of California, Santa Cruz researchers Gregory Laughlin and Eric M. Aldrich, along with Stanford researcher Joseph A. Grundfest, focused on the wider market environment but concluded one group was responsible.

Laughlin works in the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, while Aldrich has an economics background and Grundfest a legal focus. The trio discovered other worldly anomalies in their study and then modeled performance to buttress claims that Kansas City-based Waddell and Reed are to be blamed for the flash crash, not the young trader Sarao operating out of his parents basement.

In part they point to knowledge a flash crash would result from the behavior, but an algorithmic event of this magnitude had never before occurred so benchmarks or exceptions for its occurrence had not been publicly discussed prior to the event.

ValueWalk

ValueWalk

Market making software had “eye” feature that detected anomolistic behavior and order imbalances, but this key point was never mentioned

The academic work spotlighted key insight regarding the flash crash in some significant ways, most particularly in focusing on the larger market environment and not just transactional data.

Advertisement

While this tends to support the thesis that multiple market forces were at work and blaming one person or group is narrow in focus, it also points to anomalistic behavior in the market environment.

Related stories

This is key point when one understands how the market making software generates bid and ask prices that are direct causation for market price moves.

Consider the anomalies: University of California, Santa Cruz researchers Gregory Laughlin and Eric M. Aldrich, along with Stanford researcher Joseph A. Grundfest, focused on the wider market environment but concluded one group was responsible. Laughlin works in the Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, while Aldrich has an economics background and Grundfest a legal focus.

The trio discovered other worldly anomalies in their study and then modeled performance to buttress claims that Kansas City-based Waddell and Reed are to be blamed for the flash crash, not the young trader Sarao operating out of his parents basement.

Advertisement

In part they point to knowledge a flash crash would result from the behavior, but an algorithmic event of this magnitude had never before occurred so benchmarks or exceptions for its occurrence had not been publicly discussed prior to the event.

Market anomalies are important because the then market making software could be programmed to pull liquidity

After noting anomalies in trade flow on a microsecond basis, and claiming that the trading speed bumps instituted by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange did not promote stability (despite prices moving higher after the CME reaction), the researchers spotlight a critical component: market anomalies.

"This anomaly suggests that increasingly stale prices for the SPY ETF were disseminated to the market and that the inception of this reporting delay correlates strongly with the start of the Flash Crash. When the delay reached 90 seconds, these late re-ported trades began to be labeled as delayed (in accordance with regulations then in force). Recovery from the Crash began immediately thereafter. Our analysis of these data feed anomalies is ongoing. The objective of our ongoing research is to attempt to discern whether these anomalies were a symptom of the rapid trading that accompanied the Flash Crash or whether they were causal in the sense that they rationally contributed to traders’ decisions to withdraw liquidity and then restore it after the anomalies were restored."

Bingo! Near the period of the flash crash, the market making systems that determined bid and ask prices had a market environment detection methodology. Understanding prevailing market environment analysis is known deep inside quantitative circles and some strategies are said to adjust algorithmic strategy based on market environment detection.

With regards to the market making systems, they were known to observe microsecond market environment and adjust pricing accordingly. While the detection systems were sometimes known by different names, a generic term used by market practitioners was the “electronic eye.”

Advertisement

During the period around the flash crash, the “electronic eye” and how it could be influenced was a highly confidential but widely discussed topic in some circles.

Traders who attempted to influence this mechanism were sometimes bullied or punished by provincial regulators as clear “rules of the road” had yet to be formalized and are just now being published.

(Multiple unconfirmed reports from those involved in the situation prior to the flash crash point to exchange officials having behind closed door “heated discussions” with presumed market manipulators at a time when all involved were witnessing a significant change in market structure from pit to electronic trading.)

A key point in how this “electronic eye” operated is in recognizing its data inputs. While each market maker had their own algorithmic method for making a two-sided market, many players were known to consider deep analysis of the “order book,” including analysis of other quotes.

Advertisement

In 2010 some trading systems differentiated in they considered the significance of deeper out of the money quotes, but others were said not to differentiate.

ValueWalk

Report says deep order book imbalances at the time were not involved in flash crash, but also says that searching for such imbalances was impossible on an “ex-post” basis

Market manipulators at the time were said to have focused on tactics that deceive the market making software, creating temporary, small yet directionally beneficial “flash crashes.” Few if any were known to expect their actions to result in the significant carnage that occurred during the 2010 flash crash.

What is odd about the most recent academic report is that it doesn’t even address operational specifications of the market making system that ended up withdrawing liquidity.

While its consideration of the wider market environment is notable, it seems incomplete to a degree without the context of how the market making software operated during crisis.

Advertisement

In fact, the report says that deep order book imbalances did not impact price relationships. “Our empirical analysis suggests, however, that there is little to no relationship between deep order book imbalances and subsequent price movements, the report said, calling the impact minuscule over the relevant time horizons.”

This point is debatable to a degree, but then they seem to nullify their own statement by saying the required supporting data cannot be analyzed through the lens of past performance:

If trading algorithms were searching for imbalance signals deep in the E-mini order book, and if those imbalances contributed to the exit of non-HFT traders, such a mechanism cannot be disproven ex-post.

The key point is that these market making mechanisms could be set any way the programmer so chose, including the insertion of customized code into certain systems, and there is currently no public record of this behavior, although some market makers were known to keep internal records of such behavior used to analyze and improve algorithmic design and performance.

The market making systems at the time were known to have mechanisms that allowed programmers to design triggers that pulled bids and offers when anomalistic behavior was detected. Many of these triggers were designed with a keen eye towards order imbalances.

Advertisement

The importance of imbalances on algorithmic markets cannot be understated, as the flash crash research from JPMorgan’s Marko Kolanovic illustrates.

ValueWalk

Today’s market making systems have significantly evolved from 2010

The market making systems were known to have evolved significantly since 2010 and today –algorithms are now designed to detect other algorithms and automatically trigger aggressive behavior.

We live in a new world indeed. But in any world, analysis of the flash crash without at least providing some context or even mention of the operational nature of the market making system that could pull bids and offers seems unbalanced.

What likely won’t be unbalanced is the Sarao trial, which will likely focus on his knowledge of illegal activity and be broken down into understandable components.

Advertisement

In their previous benchmark trial, for the first time convicting a “spoofer” of activities that damaged market structure security, the Chicago DoJ attorneys prosecuting the offense and their FBI counterparts were said to have brought a “flawless” case, a well-known Chicago journalistic source who watched the trial first hand told ValueWalk at the time.

Sarao will be likely entering a shark tank if the case ever gets to Chicago, as offenses that damage overall market security are treated as a priority in the region. But first Sarao is likely to test his case on an extradition basis, claiming that spoofing and the infractions which with he is charged are not illegal in England.

Fact is they are not illegal much of anywhere except in the U.S., which shows the evolving nature of the electronic market place.

When asked why they didn’t include analysis of the then market making regime or how they could assume that deep order book quotes had no material impact after stating they could not be analyzed ex-post, the authors of the report did not respond by publication time.

Advertisement. Here's the basic outline of what caused the biggest one-day point decline in the history of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. On May 6, 2010, the primary market makers in the stock market just stopped automatically taking the other side of everyone else's trades. This made the market extremely illiquid. Sell orders had no immediate bids, which basically meant the market became a bottomless pit for a few minutes.

A brief historymight help to explain this. In the old days, important stocks were monitored by so-called "specialists" who worked on the trading floors of the stock exchanges. They were charged with keeping the market "orderly." This meant they would temporarily take the other side of trades when unmatched orders to buy or sell came in.

The government hated these guys. It was constantly accusing them of cheating investors in one way or another. The policy makers did everything they could to wipe out the specialists, replacing them with computers.

As a result of the government's war on specialists, much of liquidity in the market now comes from high-frequency trading computers. Let's call them High Freaks. These things can execute trades at the speed of light.

Mainly, they make money by executing an enormous volume of trades around small price points. You sell for one dollar, they buy for a dollar and one tenth of a cent. They they sell for a dollar and two tenths of a cent. Do that often enough and you're talking real money.. 2010 Flash Crash The Stock Market Crash of March 6, 2010 Over 1.8 million professionals use CFI to learn accounting, financial analysis, modeling and more. Start with a free account to explore 20+ always-free courses and hundreds of finance templates and cheat sheets.

Start Free Written by CFI Team

What is the 2010 Flash Crash?

The 2010 Flash Crash is the market crash that occurred on May 6, 2010. During the 2010 crash, leading US stock indices, including the Dow Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500, and Nasdaq Composite Index, tumbled and partially rebounded in less than an hour. The day was distinguished by high volatility in trading of all types of securities, including stocks, futures, options, and ETFs.

Although the market indices managed to partially rebound in the same day, the flash crash erased almost $1 trillion in market value.

2010 Flash Crash: Main Events

Beginning in the morning, trading on major US markets on May 6, 2010 showed a negative trend. It was mainly due to concerns regarding the financial situation in Greece and the upcoming elections in the UK. By afternoon, the major indices of equities and futures were down by 4% from their previous day’s close.

By 2:30 p.m., trading was becoming extremely turbulent. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) lost almost 1,000 points in around 10 minutes. However, in the next 30 minutes, the index recovered almost 600 points.

Other market indices across North America were also affected by the Flash Crash. The S&P 500 Volatility Index increased by 22.5% on the same day, while the S&P/TSX Composite Index in Canada lost more than 5% of its value in between 2:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.

By the end of the trading day, the major indices regained more than half of the lost values. Nevertheless, the Flash Crash took away around $1 trillion in the market value.

Investigation of the 2010 Flash Crash

After the Flash Crash, the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) conducted an investigation of the possible causes of the unexpected market event. In September 2010, the SEC published a report containing the findings of its investigation.

According to the report, before the flash crash, the markets were particularly fragile and were exposed to extreme turbulence. A single selling order of an enormously large amount of E-Mini S&P contracts and subsequent aggressive selling orders executed by high-frequency algorithms triggered the massive decline in market prices, which was already accruing exponentially due to prevailing negative market trends at that time.

The immense volatility compelled many high-frequency traders to halt their trading. The trading of E-Mini S&P contracts was paused to prevent it from further declines. When the trading of the contracts resumed, their prices started to stabilize. The markets started to regain their positions as the prices of many securities returned to near their initial levels.

The DJIA on May 6, 2010 (11:00 AM – 4:00 PM EST)

After the Flash Crash

The results of different investigations of the 2010 Flash Crash led to conclusions that the high-frequency traders played a significant role in the crash. The aggressive selling and buying of large volumes of securities resulted in enormous price volatility in the financial markets. At minimum, the activities of high-frequency traders exacerbated the effects of the crash.

In 2015, London-based trader Navinder Singh Sarao was arrested following allegations of market manipulation that resulted in the Flash Crash. According to the charges, Sarao’s trading algorithm executed a number of large selling orders of E-Mini S&P contracts to push the prices down, which ultimately triggered the market crash.

Related Readings

Thank you for reading CFI’s explanation of the Flash Crash. CFI offers the Financial Modeling & Valuation Analyst (FMVA)™ certification program for those looking to take their careers to the next level. To learn more about related topics, check out the following resources:. The CFTC claims that Sarao, using a computer algorithm, placed large orders to sell E-mini S&P 500 stocks with no intention of ever completing the agreements. These orders were priced competitively, so as not to stand out and attract attention as being unusually high or low, the CFTC said.. The Dow Jones Industrial Average slumped nearly 1,000 points in a matter of minutes in the flash crash of 2010, sending traders into a panic and inciting scrutiny of the U.S. equities markets that's still being felt four years later.



The May 6, 2010, crash was initially blamed on a "fat-finger" error made at Citigroup —a theory that was later shot down and ultimately attributed to investment firm Waddell & Reed. But in addition to that trading error, a number of possible reasons for the crash has since come to light. One of those supposed causes was high-frequency trading, according to a report from the Securities and Exchange Commission that year.. . 