A Canadian garden center had its Facebook ad for onion seeds taken down by the platform on Monday.

Facebook said the ad was removed for breaking its rules on "products with overtly sexual positioning."

Facebook's head of comms in Canada said the post had been restored on Wednesday, and that it had been initially removed by the platform's automated moderation systems.

"We use automated technology to keep nudity off our apps. But sometimes it doesn't know a walla walla onion from a, well, you know."

Visit Business Insider's homepage for more stories.

NEW LOOK Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Advertisement

Facebook's AI struggles to tell the difference between sexual pictures of the human body and globular vegetables.

A garden center in Newfoundland, Canada on Monday received a notice from Facebook about an ad it had uploaded for Walla Walla onion seeds that contained a photo of some onions.

Related stories

Facebook's notice said the ad broke its rules on "products with overtly sexual positioning," clarifying: "listings may not position products or services in a sexually suggestive manner."

The Seed Company NL, Facebook.

Facebook on Wednesday told Canada's CBC News the ad had been reinstated after review. The mistake had been made by its AI moderation tech, which automatically takes down content it thinks contains nudity, it said.

Advertisement

"We use automated technology to keep nudity off our apps. But sometimes it doesn't know a walla walla onion from a, well, you know. We restored the ad and are sorry for the business' trouble," Meg Sinclair, Facebook Canada's head of communications told CBC.

She did not clarify what she meant by a "you know."

This is not the first time Facebook's automated systems have over-zealously removed content later reinstated by human moderators. In 2018 its systems took down a post containing excerpts from the Declaration of Independence after it flagged the post as containing hate speech.. Are onions naked or clothed in their natural form? Facebook's Artificial Intelligence (AI) seems to be having an issue telling the difference between pictures with sexual connotations referring to the human body and vegetables that are just round in shape. A garden centre in Newfoundland, Canada on Monday received a notice from Facebook about an ad they had uploaded for Walla Walla onion seeds which had photos of some onions. Facebook's notice said the ad broke its rules on "products with overtly sexual positioning," clarifying: "listings may not position products or services in a sexually suggestive manner." Facebook Bans Nudity? Social Media Removes Flemish Paintings by Rubens For Nude Content.

Also Read | How to Add Stunning Wallpapers to WhatsApp Chats

The Seed Company by E.W. Gaze shared pictures of the onions with the caption, "So we just got notified by Facebook that the photo used for our Walla Walla Onion seed is 'Overtly Sexual' and therefore cannot be advertised to be sold on their platform...Can you see it?" CBC News quoted Jackson McLean, a manager at the Newfoundland-based firm as saying, "I guess something about the two round shapes there could be misconstrued as boobs or something, nude in some way. You’d have to have a pretty active imagination to look at that and get something sexual out of it." He later asked for the site to review the ban, and did not get a reply from him.

Here Are Onions Who Invited Trouble on Themselves!

Also Read | UP Horror: Differently-Abled Girl Raped in Shikohabad, Minor Sexually Assaulted by Two in Dadri

So we just got notified by Facebook that the photo used for our Walla Walla Onion seed is "Overtly Sexual" and therefore cannot be advertised to be sold on their platform... 😂 Can you see it? Posted by The Seed Company by E.W. Gaze on Saturday, October 3, 2020

Meg Sinclair, Facebook Canada's head of communications told CBC, "We use automated technology to keep nudity off our apps. But sometimes it doesn't know a walla walla onion from a, well, you know. We restored the ad and are sorry for the business' trouble." In the past too, Facebook's automated systems have removed similar content only to be reinstated by human moderators. In 2018, they had taken down a post containing excerpts from the Declaration of Independence after it flagged a post containing hate speech.. 