In February 2019, Nijeer Parks was accused of shoplifting candy and trying to hit a police officer with a car at a Hampton Inn in Woodbridge, N.J. The police had identified him using facial recognition software, even though he was 30 miles away at the time of the incident.

Mr. Parks spent 10 days in jail and paid around $5,000 to defend himself. In November 2019, the case was dismissed for lack of evidence.

Mr. Parks, 33, is now suing the police, the prosecutor and the City of Woodbridge for false arrest, false imprisonment and violation of his civil rights.

He is the third person known to be falsely arrested based on a bad facial recognition match. In all three cases, the people mistakenly identified by the technology have been Black men.. Editor’s note: This article has been updated to remove the name of a facial recognition software firm. It is unknown which facial recognition program was used to identify Nijeer Parks. It has also been updated to include a statement from the New Jersey Attorney General’s Office.

When Nijeer Parks walked out of a New Jersey prison in 2016, he returned to his family in Paterson and told them he was done messing up his life.. A New Jersey man sued police and prosecutors, claiming he was wrongly arrested and jailed after facial recognition software mistakenly linked him to a hotel theft.

Nijeer Parks, 33, a Black man from Paterson, said his grandmother told him on Jan. 30, 2019, that an arrest warrant had been issued for him, according to the civil lawsuit filed in Passaic County.

He was accused of shoplifting from a Hampton Inn gift store in Woodbridge and then clipping a police car as he sped off. But Parks said in early 2019 that he didn't own a car and that at the time had never possessed a driver's license.

Parks said he went to Woodbridge police headquarters on Feb. 5 to clear up the mistake and was arrested.

"As he had previously told the clerk, plaintiff told the interrogators that [he] had never had a driver's license, that he had never owned a car, and that he had never even been in Woodbridge," according to the lawsuit by Parks' attorney, Daniel Sexton.

"Plaintiff also gave ... a solid alibi that proved he could not have done what he was suspected of doing," the suit says.

Parks claimed that as he sat in jail for 10 days, police and prosecutors didn't bother to check fingerprints and DNA at the scene that could have cleared him.

"Defendant police department was relying solely on the faulty and illegal [facial recognition software] or some analogous program while all evidence and forensics confirmed plaintiff had no relationship to the suspect for the crimes," according to Sexton.

Sexton said all charges were dropped.

County prosecutors and jailers, Woodbridge police and the mayor are named as respondents.

A Woodbridge spokesman declined to comment Tuesday, claiming that no one from the township had been served with the lawsuit yet. Representatives for prosecutors and jailers didn't immediately return messages seeking their response.

While use of facial recognition technology is growing, critics say algorithms struggle to distinguish faces of people with dark skin.

Nathan Freed Wessler, a staff lawyer for the ACLU's Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project, said Tuesday that Parks' arrest was the result of "flawed and privacy-invading surveillance technology."

"There are likely many more wrongful interrogations, arrests, and possibly even convictions because of this technology that we still do not know about," Wessler said in a statement, adding that "this technology disproportionately harms the Black community."

CORRECTION (Dec. 29, 2020, 10:50 p.m. ET): A previous version of this article and an accompanying photo caption misspelled Nijeer Parks' hometown. It is Paterson, New Jersey, not Patterson.. It has become commonplace for government agencies and law enforcement, particularly in large metropolitan areas, to use facial recognition software. These entities are a major client base of Clearview AI (“Clearview”), as we disclosed last year here on CPW. These practices, though, have garnered recent public attention and some controversy. In response to concerns raised by media coverage of Clearview’s practices, three cities last year banned their governments from using facial recognition technology, and another banned all corporate uses of facial recognition technology in public spaces. However, for the most part government utilization of facial recognition software has continued unabated.

But using such software is not without risks, as shown by a lawsuit recently filed against law enforcement officers and prosecutors. In Parks v. McCormack, et al., Case No. L-003672-20 (N.J.), the plaintiff alleges he spent ten days wrongfully imprisoned after facial recognition software used by a New Jersey police department mistakenly identified him as a suspect in a criminal investigation. This was allegedly notwithstanding that the plaintiff’s fingerprints and DNA did not match those left at the scene of the crime, and that the plaintiff provided an alibi at the time of his detention. The complaint alleges that the police department involved was relying solely on facial recognition technology in issuing the warrant for the plaintiff’s arrest. Plaintiff filed suit against the police, the prosecutor, and the municipality involved for false arrest, false imprisonment and violation of his civil rights. The lawsuit comes almost one year after New Jersey’s attorney general asked state prosecutors to stop using Clearview AI’s app and announced an ongoing investigation into it and similar facial recognition software.

The plaintiff is the third person reported to have been falsely arrested based on an incorrect facial recognition match. Notably, in all three instances the individuals mistakenly identified by the software were Black men—underscoring racial bias concerns previously raised about the adoption of facial recognition technology by government bodies. The Parks lawsuit names as defendants the officials and government entities involved in the plaintiff’s allegedly wrongful detention and imprisonment. However, due to the doctrine of governmental immunity, which shields the government from liability for the actions of state or federal employees under certain circumstances, future litigations may also seek to bring direct claims against the manufacturers of such software – and Clearview is certainly no stranger to privacy litigation. Stay tuned.