Apple’s self-driving cars had trouble navigating streets, frequently bumped into curbs and veered out of lanes in the middle of intersections during test drives near the company’s Silicon Valley headquarters, according to a report.

Apple has been trying to work out the kinks in Project Titan, its autonomous electric vehicle program, since it sent several of the self-driving cars on a test run along a 40-mile stretch from Bozeman, Mont., to the nearby Big Sky ski resort last August, according to The Information.

The test drive was a seeming success, as the prototypes managed to make the journey without needing the aid of three-dimensional road maps that are typically used by other firms that are developing self-driving fleets.

The demonstration was even filmed using aerial drones. The images and footage were then used to make a flashy promotional video to impress top Apple executives, including CEO Tim Cook, according to the report.

But engineers at the iPhone maker were dismayed when the test vehicles struggled to conduct basic navigation maneuvers on city streets near the company’s Cupertino, Calif., headquarters.

Apple’s self-driving car division, Project Titan, has been beset by a departure of executives as well as software bugs, according to a report. Apple

According to The Information, the cars slammed into curbs and often had trouble staying in their lanes after crossing intersections.

A source told The Information that a local jogger was nearly hit by one of Project Titan’s cars as the runner was crossing the street. The car apparently did not recognize that the jogger had the right of way.

The mishaps are part and parcel of an eight-year program that has been plagued by a revolving door of departing executives as well as persistent software problems, according to The Information.

Apple wants to sell self-driving cars with no steering wheels or pedals. Apple

Ian Goodfellow, a renowned scientist who headed the machine-learning division within Project Titan, left the company, the report stated.

Apple’s self-driving car would differ from those being developed by rivals such as Google-backed Waymo and General Motors’ Cruise since it would have no steering wheel and pedals, with interiors designed around hands-off driving.

Tesla, the leading electric car maker whose vehicles include semi-autonomous technology such as autopilot, “full self-driving,” and traffic-aware cruise control features, is under investigation by the federal government after drivers got into more than 200 crashes using assistance software.

Last week, federal investigators were dispatched to Florida where a fatal collision involving a Tesla claimed the lives of two people.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which oversees motor vehicle transportation safety, would not say whether the drivers involved were using any of the semi-autonomous features when the crash occurred along I-95 near Gainesville.

Apple is pushing to launch its electric car as early as 2025. It wants to sell the autonomous vehicles to customers, while its rivals aim to roll out their versions as part of a fleet of “robotaxis” — similar to Uber, just without the driver.

The technology driving autonomous vehicles is still not ready to safely account for other environmental factors such as other cars, pedestrians, and bikes. This has forced companies to push back the anticipated rollouts of self-driving vehicles.

The Post has sought comment from Apple.. Last August, Apple sent several of its prototype self-driving cars on a roughly 40-mile trek through Montana. Aerial drones filmed the drive, from Bozeman to the ski resort town of Big Sky, so that Apple managers could produce a polished film, with picturesque mountains in the background, to show CEO Tim Cook how their costly and long-running autonomous car project, Titan, was making progress.

Inside Apple, executives hailed the demonstration as a success. The vehicles showed they could drive without relying on highly detailed, three-dimensional road maps, which most rival self-driving-car programs require. Titan managers hoped to ditch these costly and unscalable high-definition maps en route to one day building and selling a fully automated car that could work almost anywhere in the world without a steering wheel or pedals, making Apple responsible for the car’s behavior and the safety of its occupants.

The good vibes following the Bozeman demo didn’t last long. Apple’s test vehicles, which are modified Lexus SUVs, struggled to navigate streets near its Silicon Valley headquarters without the maps, smacking into curbs and sometimes having trouble staying in their lanes while crossing intersections, according to two people who worked on the program. And earlier this year, a test vehicle nearly hit a jogger who was crossing the street and had the right of way, one of these people said.. The Apple Car's First Test Drive Was A Total Disaster

Several of the automotive and technology industry's biggest names are racing to get the first self-driving car on the road, so it's no surprise Apple, the world's most valuable technology company, has thrown its hat into the ring. Although it is competing with huge names like Tesla, Mercedes, and BMW, Apple has all the tools and pedigree it needs to create a competitive self-driving car. The company has a history of producing highly polished, reliable, user-focused products, so what could go wrong? Well, a lot, apparently.

Apple's car was first rumored back in 2015 with the launch of Project Titan. Those rumors soon became reality as Apple CEO Tim Cook confirmed his company was developing autonomous tech for use in cars. Several partnerships have been formed between automotive manufacturers and tech giants over the years. The names of Apple's collaborators include Volkswagen, while Cook has reportedly courted Nissan, Hyundai-Kia, McLaren, and Chinese electric vehicle manufacturer BYD, according to the Financial Times.

However, it has not been smooth sailing for the Project Titan team. Apple laid off around 200 employees working on the project in 2019 as part of a restructuring. Key figures have also jumped ship to other major companies. Head self-driving engineer Joe Bass left for Meta, while Doug Field — who was also working on the project — decided to jump ship and join Ford. The project was also on the verge of cancelation a number of times, which means its latest struggles could turn out to be the final nail in the coffin for Apple's autonomous driving project. Now news has emerged about the autonomous car's driving abilities. If true, far from being road-ready, Apple's driving AI might actually be a bit dangerous in its present iteration.