Twitter has admitted it amplifies more tweets from rightwing politicians and news outlets than content from leftwing sources.

The social media platform examined tweets from elected officials in seven countries – the UK, US, Canada, France, Germany, Spain and Japan. It also studied whether political content from news organisations was amplified on Twitter, focusing primarily on US news sources such as Fox News, the New York Times and BuzzFeed.

The study compared Twitter’s “Home” timeline – the default way its 200 million users are served tweets, in which an algorithm tailors what users see – with the traditional chronological timeline where the most recent tweets are ranked first.

The research found that in six out of seven countries, apart from Germany, tweets from rightwing politicians received more amplification from the algorithm than those from the left; right-leaning news organisations were more amplified than those on the left; and generally politicians’ tweets were more amplified by an algorithmic timeline than by the chronological timeline.

According to a 27-page research document, Twitter found a “statistically significant difference favouring the political right wing” in all the countries except Germany. Under the research, a value of 0% meant tweets reached the same number of users on the algorithm-tailored timeline as on its chronological counterpart, whereas a value of 100% meant tweets achieved double the reach. On this basis, the most powerful discrepancy between right and left was in Canada (Liberals 43%; Conservatives 167%), followed by the UK (Labour 112%; Conservatives 176%). Even excluding top government officials, the results were similar, the document said.

Twitter said it wasn’t clear why its Home timeline produced these results and indicated that it may now need to change its algorithm. A blog post by Rumman Chowdhury, Twitter’s director of software engineering, and Luca Belli, a Twitter researcher, said the findings could be “problematic” and that more study needed to be done. The post acknowledged that it was concerning if certain tweets received preferential treatment not as a result of the way in which users interacted, but because of the inbuilt way the algorithm works.

“Algorithmic amplification is problematic if there is preferential treatment as a function of how the algorithm is constructed versus the interactions people have with it. Further root cause analysis is required in order to determine what, if any, changes are required to reduce adverse impacts by our Home timeline algorithm,” the post said.

Twitter said it would make its research available to outsiders such as academics and it is preparing to let third parties have wider access to its data, in a move likely to put further pressure on Facebook to do the same. Facebook is being urged by politicians on both sides of the Atlantic to distribute its research to third parties after tens of thousands of internal documents – which included revelations that the company knew its Instagram app damaged teenage mental health – were leaked by the whistleblower Frances Haugen.

The Twitter study compared the two ways in which a user can view their timeline: the first uses an algorithm to provide a tailored view of tweets that the user might be interested in based on the accounts they interact with most and other factors; the other is the more traditional timeline in which the user reads the most recent posts in reverse chronological order.

The study compared the two types of timeline by considering whether some politicians, political parties or news outlets were more amplified than others. The study analysed millions of tweets from elected officials between 1 April and 15 August 2020 and hundreds of millions of tweets from news organisations, largely in the US, over the same period.

Twitter said it would make its research available to third parties but said privacy concerns prevented it from making available the “raw data”. The post said: “We are making aggregated datasets available for third party researchers who wish to reproduce our main findings and validate our methodology, upon request.”

Twitter added that it was preparing to make internal data available to external sources on a regular basis. The company said its machine-learning ethics, transparency and accountability team was finalising plans in a way that would protect user privacy.

“This approach is new and hasn’t been used at this scale, but we are optimistic that it will address the privacy-vs-accountability tradeoffs that can hinder algorithmic transparency,” said Twitter. “We’re excited about the opportunities this work may unlock for future collaboration with external researchers looking to reproduce, validate and extend our internal research.”

This article was amended on 25 October 2021. The blog post by Rumman Chowdhury and Luca Belli indicated that it was problematic if certain tweets received preferential treatment because of how the Twitter algorithm was constructed, rather than on how users interacted with it. However, an earlier version of the article had this the other way around. This has now been corrected.



. Political content is a major part of the public conversation on Twitter. Politicians, political organizations, and news outlets engage large audiences on Twitter. At the same time, Twitter employs algorithms that learn from data to sort content on the platform. This interplay of algorithmic content curation and political discourse has been the subject of intense scholarly debate and public scrutiny ( 1 15 ). When first established as a service, Twitter used to present individuals with content from accounts they followed, arranged in a reverse chronological feed. In 2016, Twitter introduced machine learning algorithms to render tweets on this feed called Home timeline based on a personalized relevance model ( 16 ). Individuals would now see older tweets deemed relevant to them, as well as some tweets from accounts they did not directly follow.

Personalized ranking prioritizes some tweets over others on the basis of content features, social connectivity, and user activity. There is evidence that different political groups use Twitter differently to achieve political goals ( 17 20 ). What has remained a matter of debate, however, is whether or not any ranking advantage falls along established political contours, such as the left or right ( 2 7 ), the center or the extremes ( 1 3 ), specific parties ( 2 7 ), or news sources of a certain political inclination ( 21 ). In this work, we provide systematic quantitative insights into this question based on a massive-scale randomized experiment on the Twitter platform.

A second limitation pertains to the fact that differences between treatment and control groups were previously used by Twitter to improve the personalized ranking experience. The treatment, that is, the ranking experience, has therefore not remained the same over time. Moreover, the changes to the treatment depend on the experiment itself.

The experimental setup has some inherent limitations. A first limitation stems from interaction effects between individuals in the analysis ( 22 ). In social networks, the control group can never be isolated from indirect effects of personalization, as individuals in the control group encounter content shared by users in the treatment group. Therefore, although a randomized controlled experiment, our experiment does not satisfy the well-known Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption from causal inference ( 23 ). As a consequence, it cannot provide unbiased estimates of causal quantities of interest, such as the average treatment effect. In this study, we chose to not employ intricate causal inference machinery that is often used to approximate causal quantities ( 24 ), as this would not guarantee unbiased estimates in the complex setting of Twitter’s home timeline algorithm. Building an elaborate causal diagram of this complex system is well beyond the scope of our observational study. Instead, we present findings based on simple comparison of measurements between the treatment and control groups. Intuitively, we expect peer effects to decrease observable differences between the control and treatment groups; thus, our reported statistics likely underestimate the true causal effects of personalization.

When Twitter introduced machine learning to personalize the Home timeline in 2016, it excluded a randomly chosen control group of 1% of all global Twitter users from the new personalized Home timeline. Individuals in this control group have never experienced personalized ranked timelines. Instead, their Home timeline continues to display tweets and retweets from accounts they follow in reverse chronological order. The treatment group corresponds to a sample of 4% of all other accounts who experience the personalized Home timeline. However, even individuals in the treatment group do have the option to opt-out of personalization ( SI Appendix , section 1.A ).

Below, we outline this experimental setup and its inherent limitations. We then introduce a measure of algorithmic amplification in order to quantify the degree to which different political groups benefit from algorithmic personalization.

We often study the amplification ratio in cases whereis a set corresponding to tweets from a single Twitter account (individual amplification). When considering how groups of accounts are amplified, we have the choice between reporting distribution of amplification ratios of the individual accounts in the group or considering a single aggregate amplification ratio (group amplification), wherecontains all tweets authored by any member of the group. We generally report both statistics. More detail on how we calculate amplification and a discussion of the difference between individual and group amplification is found in SI Appendix , section 1.D

We define the amplification ratio of set T of tweets in an audience U as the ratio of the reach of T in U intersected with the treatment group and the reach of T in U intersected with the control group. We normalize the ratio in such a way that amplification ratio 0% corresponds to equal proportional reach in treatment and control. In other words, a random user from U in the treatment group is just as likely to see a tweet in T as is a random user from U in the control group. An amplification ratio of 50% means that the treatment group is 50% more likely to encounter one of the tweets. Large amplification ratios indicate that the ranking model assigns higher relevance scores to the set of tweets, which therefore appear more often than they would in a reverse chronological ordering.

We define the reach of a setof tweets in a setof Twitter users as the total number of users fromwho encountered a tweet from the set * Think of, for example, as tweets from a group of politicians in Germany, and think of the audienceas all German Twitter users in the control group. We always consider reach within a specific time window, for example, a day.

Results

We divide our findings into two parts. First, we study tweets by elected politicians from major political parties in seven countries which were highly represented on the platform. In the second analysis, which is specific to the United States, we study whether algorithmic amplification of content from major media outlets is associated with political leaning.

We first report how personalization algorithms amplify content from elected officials from various political parties and parliamentary groups. We identified Twitter account details and party affiliation for currently serving legislators in seven countries from public data ( 25 28 ) ( SI Appendix, section 1.B ). The countries in our analysis were chosen on the basis of data availability: These countries have a large enough active Twitter user base for our analysis, and it was possible to obtain details of legislators from high-quality public sources. In cases where a legislator has multiple accounts—for example, an official and a personal account—we included all of them in the analysis. In total, we identified 3,634 accounts belonging to legislators across the seven countries (the combined size of legislatures is 3,724 representatives). We then selected original tweets authored by the legislators, including any replies and quote tweets (where they retweet a tweet while also adding original commentary). We excluded retweets without comment, as attribution is ambiguous when multiple legislators retweet the same content. When calculating amplification relating to legislators, we considered their reach only within their respective country.

To compare the amplification of political groups, we can either calculate the amplification of all tweets from the group (group amplification; Fig. 1 A and B ) or calculate amplification of each individual in the group separately (individual amplification; Fig. 1C ). The latter yields a distribution of individual amplification values for each group, thus revealing individual differences of amplifying effects within a group.

Fig. 1. Amplification of tweets from major political groups and politicians in seven countries with an active Twitter user base. (A) Group amplification of each political party or group. Within each country, parties are ordered from left to right according to their ideological position based on the 2019 Chapel Hill Expert Survey (29). A value of 0% indicates that tweets by the group reach the same number of users on ranked timelines as they do on chronological timelines. A value of 100% means double the reach. Error bars show SE estimated from bootstrap. Bootstrap resampling was performed over daily intervals as well as membership of each political group. (B) Pairwise comparison between the largest mainstream left- and right-wing parties in each country: Democrats vs. Republicans in the United States, Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan (CDP) vs. Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in Japan, Labor vs. Conservatives in the United Kingdom, Socialists vs. Republicans in France, Spanish Socialist Worker’s Party (PSOE) vs. People’s Party (Partido Popular) in Spain, Liberals vs. Conservatives in Canada, and Social Democratic Party (SPD) vs. alliance of Christian Democratic Union and Christian Social Union (CDU/CSU) in Germany. In six out of seven countries, these comparisons yield a statistically significant difference, with right being amplified more, after adjusting for multiple comparisons. In Germany, the difference is not statistically significant. (C) Amplification of tweets by individual left- and right-wing politicians in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada. Violin plots illustrate the distribution of amplification values within each party, solid lines show the median, dashed lines show 15th and 75th percentiles. There is substantial variation of individual amplification within political parties. However, there is no statistically significant dependence between an individual’s amplification and their party affiliation, in any of the four comparisons. We used abbreviations LFI for La France Insoumise, EDS for Écologie Democratie Solidarité, PP for Partido Popular, and BQ for Bloc Québeqois.

Fig. 1A compares the group amplification of major political parties in the countries we studied. Values over 0% indicate that all parties enjoy an amplification effect by algorithmic personalization, in some cases exceeding 200%, indicating that the party’s tweets are exposed to an audience 3 times the size of the audience they reach on chronological timelines. To test the hypothesis that left-wing or right-wing politicians are amplified differently, we identified the largest mainstream left or center-left and mainstream right or center-right party in each legislature, and present pairwise comparisons between these in Fig. 1B . With the exception of Germany, we find a statistically significant difference favoring the political right wing. This effect is strongest in Canada (Liberals 43% vs. Conservatives 167%) and the United Kingdom (Labor 112% vs. Conservatives 176%). In both countries, the prime ministers and members of the government are also members of the Parliament and are thus included in our analysis. We, therefore, recomputed the amplification statistics after excluding top government officials. Our findings, shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S2 , remained qualitatively similar.

When studying amplification at the level of individual politicians ( Fig. 1C ), we find that amplification varies substantially within each political party: While tweets from some individual politicians are amplified up to 400%, for others, amplification is below 0%, meaning they reach fewer users on ranked timelines than they do on chronological ones. We repeated the comparison between major left-wing and right-wing parties, comparing the distribution of individual amplification values between parties. When studied at the individual level, a permutation test detected no statistically significant association between an individual’s party affiliation and their amplification.

We see that comparing political parties on the basis of aggregate amplification of the entire party ( Fig. 1 A and B ) or on the basis of individual amplification of their members ( Fig. 1C ) leads to seemingly different conclusions: While individual amplification is not associated with party membership, the aggregate group amplification may be different for each party. These findings are not contradictory, considering that different politicians may reach overlapping audiences. Even if the amplification of individual politicians is uncorrelated with their political affiliation, when we consider increases to their combined reach, group-level correlations might emerge. For a more detailed discussion, please refer to SI Appendix, section 1.E.3

Our fine-grained data also allow us to evaluate whether recommender systems amplify extreme ideologies, far-left or far-right politicians, over more-moderate ones ( 3 ). We found that, in countries where far-left or far-right parties have substantial representation among elected officials (e.g., VOX in Spain, Die Linke [The Left] and AfD [Alternative for Germany] in Germany, and La France Insoumise and Reasemblement national [National Rally] in France), the amplification of these parties is generally lower than that of moderate/centrist parties in the same country ( SI Appendix, Fig. S1 ). Finally, we considered whether personalization consistently amplifies messages from the governing coalition or the opposition, and found no consistent pattern across countries. For example, in the United Kingdom, amplification favors the governing Conservatives, while, in Canada, the opposition Conservative Party of Canada is more highly amplified.

Tweets from legislators cover just a small portion of political content on the platform. To better understand the effects of personalization on political discourse, we extend our analysis to a broader domain of news content ( 30 31 ). Specifically, we extend our analysis to media outlets with a significant audience in the United States ( 32 ). While the political affiliation of a legislator is publicly verifiable, there is no single agreed-upon classification of the political orientation of media outlets.

To reduce subjectivity in our classification of political content, we leverage two independently curated media bias–rating datasets from AllSides ( 33 ) and Ad Fontes Media ( 34 ), and present results for both. † Both datasets assign labels to media sources based on their perceived position on the US media bias landscape. The labels describe the overall media bias of a news source on a five-point scale ranging from partisan Left through Center/Neutral to partisan Right. We then identified tweets containing links to articles from these news sources shared by anyone between 1 April 2020 and 15 August 2020. We excluded tweets pointing to nonpolitical content such as recipes or sports. Wherever possible, we separated editorial content from general news coverage, as, in some cases, these had different bias ratings ( SI Appendix, section 1.C ). The resulting dataset contains AllSides annotations for 100,575,284 unique tweets pointing to 6,258,032 articles and Ad Fontes annotations for 88,818,544 unique tweets pointing to 5,100,381 articles.

We then grouped tweets by media bias annotation of their source and calculated the aggregate amplification of each bias category ( Fig. 2 ). When using AllSides bias ratings ( Fig. 2A ), two general trends emerge: The personalization algorithms amplify sources that are more partisan compared to ones rated as Center. Secondly, the partisan Right is amplified marginally more compared to the partisan Left. The results based on Ad Fontes bias ratings ( Fig. 2B ) differ in some key ways. Most notable is the relatively low, 10.5%, amplification of the partisan Left compared to other categories. Among the remaining categories, the differences are not substantial, although the Neutral category is amplified significantly less than other categories.

Fig. 2. Amplification of news articles by Twitter’s personalization algorithms broken down by AllSides (A) and Ad Fontes (B) media bias ratings of their source. Blue squares denote the mean estimate of group amplification for each group of content, and error bars show the SD of the bootstrap estimate. Individual black circles show the amplification for the most significant positive and negative outliers within each group. For example, content from AllSides “Left” media bias category is amplified 12% by algorithms. The most significant negative outlier in this group is BuzzFeed, with an amplification of –2% compared to the chronological baseline. By contrast, Vox is amplified 16%. Negative and positive outliers are selected by a leave-one-out procedure detailed in SI Appendix, section 1.E.4.

Leave-one-out analysis of each media bias category (described in detail in SI Appendix, section 1.E.4 ) allows us to identify the most significant outliers in each category, also shown in Fig. 2 . This analysis identified BuzzFeed News, LA Times, and Breitbart (based on both AllSides and Ad Fontes ratings) as negative outliers in their respective categories, meaning the amplification of their content was less than the aggregate amplification of the bias category they belong to. Meanwhile, Fox News and New York Post were identified as positive outliers. These outliers also illustrate that, just as we saw in the case of legislators, there is significant variation among news outlets in each bias category.. S INCE LAUNCHING a policy on “misleading information” in May, Twitter has clashed with President Donald Trump. When he described mail-in ballots as “substantially fraudulent”, the platform told users to “get the facts” and linked to articles that proved otherwise. After Mr Trump threatened looters with death—“when the looting starts, the shooting starts”—Twitter said his tweet broke its rules against “glorifying violence”. On July 28th the site took down a tweet by Donald Trump junior promoting a malaria drug for covid-19 that plenty of studies discredit.