Mark Ferenchik

mferenchik@dispatch.com

Smart Columbus has parked its two self-driving shuttles in Linden after one unexpectedly stopped in the middle of a route and a woman fell from her seat onto the floor.

The shuttle had just left the Douglas Community Recreation Center on Windsor Avenue about noon Thursday when it unexpectedly stopped on the street, Smart Columbus spokeswoman Alyssa Chenault said Monday.

The woman sought medical attention, Chenault said.

Columbus Fire medics were sent to East 12th Avenue and took the woman to Ohio State University Hospital East with minor injuries, Battalion Chief Steve Martin said.

Chenault did not provide the name of the woman. She said Smart Columbus notified the U.S. Department of Transportation and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

In the meantime, Smart Columbus has halted shuttle service.

“We wanted to err on the side of caution,” Chenault said. “We took both shuttles out of service until (Denver-based shuttle manufacturer) EasyMile could come into town Monday to look into it further.”

In May 2019, the Columbus City Council approved a $1.1 million contract with EasyMile for the automated vehicle shuttle service.

EmpowerBus is the local operator for Smart Columbus. An operator is always on board to monitor the shuttle.

The two 12-passenger shuttles began running Feb. 5.

The shuttle pilot program, which ends in February 2021, is the result of Columbus winning the Smart City Challenge in 2016. That brought in a $40 million U.S. Department of Transportation grant and a $10 million grant from Paul G. Allen Philanthropies.

The Transport Workers Union, which represents Central Ohio Transit Authority drivers, has opposed self-driving buses and asked for an independent investigation to determine what happened Thursday.

“This is dangerous and risky technology, ” said John Samuelsen, the president of the union’s international.

“It’s outrageous that Columbus is treating its transit-starved residents of Linden as guinea pigs, putting them in harm’s way instead of providing transit with trained professional operators at the controls,” he said.

mferench@dispatch.com

@MarkFerenchik. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has partially suspended the US operations of France’s EasyMile after a passenger in Ohio was injured while riding in one of the company’s self-driving shuttles. EasyMile can continue operating its shuttles while NHTSA investigates, but the company can’t carry any passengers.

EasyMile currently operates its self-driving shuttles in a handful of US cities, including in Columbus, Ohio, where two of them have been running along a nearly 3-mile loop in a residential area at speeds of up to 25 miles per hour, according to Reuters. But last week, one of those shuttles made an “emergency stop” from a speed of just 7 miles per hour, and a passenger fell out of their seat as a result.

A local news report says the passenger “sought medical attention” and that Smart Columbus (the citywide transportation project that hired EasyMile) halted the service out of caution. The two shuttles started running the loop earlier this month.

Despite the agency taking a very hands-off approach to regulating autonomous vehicles under the Trump administration, this is not the first time NHTSA (which is part of the Department of Transportation) has intervened in a self-driving shuttle trial. In 2018, the agency suspended an autonomous school bus project in Florida that used EasyMile shuttles, calling the program “unlawful.”

The decision to suspend EasyMile’s operations came on the same day that the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) pilloried NHTSA during a hearing about a fatal crash involving Tesla’s Autopilot system. Members of the NTSB — which is an independent government agency with no regulatory authority — took NHTSA to task for not regulating advanced driver assistance systems like Autopilot and for not responding to multiple safety board recommendations.. 