Data from the jetliner that crashed into the Java Sea last month shows the pilots fought to save the plane almost from the moment it took off, as the Boeing 737’s nose was repeatedly forced down, apparently by an automatic system receiving incorrect sensor readings.

The information from the flight data recorder, contained in a preliminary report prepared by Indonesian crash investigators and released on Wednesday, documents a fatal tug of war between man and machine, with the plane’s nose forced dangerously downward over two dozen times during the 11-minute flight.

The pilots managed to pull the nose back up over and over until finally losing control, leaving the plane, Lion Air Flight 610, to plummet into the ocean at 450 miles per hour, killing all 189 people on board.. [JAKARTA] A malfunctioning sensor at the centre of the investigation into the Oct 29 crash of a Lion Air jetliner into the Java Sea wasn't repaired before the fatal flight even though it had failed on the plane's previous trip, according to a preliminary investigative report.

A mechanic worked on other sensors and equipment during a night shift before the early morning departure, but not on the so-called angle-of-attack vane, according to Indonesia's National Transportation Safety Committee. Portions of the committee's report were viewed by Bloomberg News before a scheduled release on Wednesday.

The report doesn't offer a cause for the accident but provides the most detailed look so far into the chaotic minutes before the crash and into the steps that were taken to address malfunctions that occurred on the plane the previous night. On both flights, pilots reported that they had difficulty figuring out basic information such as speed and altitude.

The pilots on Flight 610, which plunged into the Java Sea more than 11 minutes after it took off from Jakarta, appeared not to understand what was happening to them as they radioed air traffic controllers asking for their altitude and speed. They said they had an unspecified "flight control problem," according to the report. Lion Air spokesman Danang Prihantoro didn't answer calls seeking comments when tried on his mobile phone on Wednesday.

Everyone aboard died in the crash, although there are conflicting counts for the death toll. A weight and balance calculation lists 188 people - two pilots, five flight attendants and 181 passengers. Another listing known as a voyage report lists an extra flight attendant for a total of 189 people.

The Boeing Co 737 Max 8's angle-of-attack sensor, which measures how high or low the plane's nose was pointed relative to the oncoming air, had malfunctioned on the previous flight as well as in the minutes before the crash, according to the report. The sensor erroneously concluded the nose was pointed too high and the aircraft was in danger of losing lift, prompting a stall warning in the cockpit and triggering safety software that attempted to put them into a dive.

The two sets of pilots reacted differently to the multiple errors messages and malfunctions. On the previous flight, the pilots were able to shut off the motor that was trying to push down the nose relatively soon after taking off.

For reasons that haven't been explained, the pilots on Flight 610 didn't take that step - which is part of a long-standing emergency procedure. The plane's crash-proof cockpit recorder hasn't been recovered, so investigators don't have much insight into what they were thinking as they responded to the emergency.

Boeing declined to comment on the preliminary report. It is working as a technical adviser to the Indonesian investigation.

"We will analyze any additional information as it becomes available," the aircraft maker said in a statement on Tuesday. "We are taking every measure to fully understand all aspects of this accident, working closely with the investigation team and the relevant government authorities."

Earlier this month the manufacturer issued a bulletin to operators of the Max reminding them that such a cascade of failures could be addressed by an existing emergency procedure. The manufacturer has said it's confident in the safety of the latest version of its 737 model.

EARLIER FLIGHT

On the Oct 28 flight that landed safely in Jakarta, the captain told investigators that he scanned cockpit instruments and determined that the copilot's readings matched a third standby system and were accurate. He turned over control of the plane to the copilot.

By contrast, the captain on the flight that crashed radioed a controller about a minute before the plane disappeared from radar to say that all of the plane's altitude gauges were different and they couldn't determine how high they were.

Investigators will focus on how the airline performed maintenance on the plane.

The captain on the Oct 28 flight reported problems with speed and altitude readings and with a system called Feel Differential Pressure, which controls the force pilots need to push or pull the control column that raises and lowers the nose, according to the report. There was no indication that the angle of attack sensor was malfunctioning.

An angle of attack sensor had been replaced and tested just before the Oct 28 flight. According to flight data from the plane, the sensor on the left was reading about 20 degrees differently from the one on the right.

On both flights, a device known as a stick shaker - a warning that the wings are about to lose lift, which vibrates the control column and also makes a loud thumping noise - was activated shortly after takeoff for the captain but not the copilot, according to the data. It was triggered by the faulty sensor.

It also triggered safety software newly added to the Max. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is designed to ensure the wings don't lose lift, which is known as an aerodynamic stall. It was programmed to automatically lower the nose and was doing so for most of the 11-minute flight even though the plane was not close to stalling.

The pilots on the flight that crashed responded by hitting a switch on their control column that temporarily raised the nose, but it only stopped the MCAS temporarily. They apparently never shut off the motor activating the movement as the pilots did on the previous flight.

Indonesian authorities met with passenger families on Tuesday in Bangka and Jakarta to provide a snapshot of preliminary findings. Those who attended the briefing say it didn't indicate a cause for the crash.

"There was no explanation related to Boeing," said Ari Priawan, whose brother, sister-in-law and their child were on board Flight 610.

Investigators say they hope to resume the search for the plane's voice data recorder when equipment is obtained. A ship that can hold its position in one spot without casting anchor is needed because of the presence of many gas pipelines in the area, said Nurcahyo Utomo, the lead investigator.

"The search for the cockpit voice recorder will resume," Mr Utomo said. "We are hoping to start this week and will put in our maximum efforts."

BLOOMBERG. . The Editorial Board, USA TODAY

“Know your airplane, fly your airplane” is a bedrock principle for pilots.

But pilots can’t know their airplane if the maker fails to disclose a new emergency feature in its flight operations manual, as happened with the Boeing 737 Max.

On Oct. 29, the feature, known by the acronym MCAS, relentlessly pushed down the nose of Indonesia’s Lion Air Flight 610 more than 20 times before the jet plunged into the Java Sea, killing all 189 on board.

Pilots struggled against the new system, which is designed to prevent a stall by automatically pushing the nose down. Tragically, on Flight 610 it was apparently triggered by a sensor delivering a false reading. There was no stall.

The 737 Max, Boeing's newest version of the workhorse 737 series, is flown by airlines around the world, including American, Southwest and United. Hundreds more are on order. Since the Lion Air crash, American and Southwest pilots have complained about Boeing’s failure to communicate.

BOEING:Safety will always be a core value

“The key to any emergency is identifying the system that is betraying you or failed,” says Dennis Tajer, a veteran 737 captain and spokesman for the Allied Pilots Association, which represents pilots at American.

“We did not know about the system" until after the Lion Air crash. It was not on previous versions of the 737. Jon Weaks, a Southwest captain and president of Southwest Airlines Pilots Association, put it simply: "We should have known the system existed."

With all the safety built into today’s jetliners, it typically takes a cascading series of events to bring down a plane. Based on a preliminary report released last week by Indonesian authorities and questions raised by safety experts, the final flight of Lion Air 610 is a textbook example of multiple failures.

Investigators will need to get to the bottom of several issues involving:

►Boeing. A potential design or manufacturing flaw might have allowed a single sensor, with an erroneous reading, to trigger MCAS — which stands for Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System — and the nose-down movements. Two sensors on the jet were measuring what’s known as angle of attack, “one giving you an accurate reading, one inaccurate,” says former National Transportation Safety Board Chair Mark Rosenker. “The problem was the inaccurate one appeared to take over.” He questioned why a single malfunctioning sensor could create a situation potentially leading to a catastrophic failure. The answer might be that it shouldn't.

Within days of the crash, Boeing issued a bulletin telling 737 Max pilots to deal with erroneous sensor data and nose-down movements by turning off the automatic system, in accordance with “existing procedures.” A Federal Aviation Administration directive followed, warning that erroneous readings could cause “difficulty controlling the airplane” and “possible impact with terrain.”

►Lion Air. The day before the crash, Lion Air maintenance replaced the sensor on the same plane. But pilots got erroneous readings on that flight and experienced a nearly identical problem to the one on Flight 610. Was the sensor installed properly by company crews? Based on the serious problems on Oct. 28, should the plane have been grounded before the fatal flight?

►Flight 610 pilots. On the Oct. 28 flight, pilots initially reacted to the nose-down movements the same way as pilots on Flight 610 the next day. When that didn’t work, they used two switches to cut off the system — a standard emergency procedure. It is baffling that the pilots on Flight 610 failed to do the same thing. Perhaps faced by an inaccurate reading from a faulty sensor and a system they likely knew nothing about, they were confused in the emergency. Perhaps they were not well-trained. For now, that remains a mystery.

The causes of the crash will be determined by Indonesian authorities and the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board, which has an interest in keeping American fleets safe.

Boeing issued a statement asserting, “We are confident in the safety of the 737 MAX." A company spokesman added that the “function performed by MCAS is referenced” in the flight manual, and “existing procedures” to deal with it are documented. The chairman of the United Airlines branch of the Airline Pilots Association echoed that statement, breaking with two other unions and his own union leadership.

Backup systems, what the industry calls redundancy, are designed to keep planes in the air if one component fails. The ultimate safety backups are the pilots — who deserve to know about every change on the aircraft they fly.

If you can't see this reader poll, please refresh your page.. A wallet belonging to a victim of the Lion Air passenger jet. Photo / AP

Possible faulty equipment that led to the crash of Lion Air Flight 610 was the same sort of sensing gear that contributed to the crash of an Air New Zealand A320 off Perpignan 10 years ago.

A failure of air flow monitoring pitot tubes on board the Lion Air Boeing 737 has been cited as a possible contributor to yesterday's crash off Indonesia which killed 189 people.



A report in the New York Times says the erratic flight path before the high speed plunge indicated a problem with the pressure sensitive instruments near the nose of the plane.

"The erratic flight path makes us suspect a problem with the pitot-static system," said Gerry Soejatman, an Indonesian aviation expert.

Data from the flight indicated an ''erratic climb and ground speed problem", leading him to suspect a problem with the instruments had also been an issue then.

Several plane crashes have been blamed on blockages or other problems with pitot tubes which resulted in erroneous speed or altitude readings, the Times reported.

In November 2008 an Airbus A320 that had been leased by Air New Zealand to a European carrier crashed, killing two German pilots and five New Zealanders on board.

The plane had been on a routine test flight, prior to being handed back to Air New Zealand by XL Airways Germany, a charter company that had been leasing it for the previous two years.

An inquiry found that the crash was triggered by a test that was conducted at low speed and low altitude, throwing the plane into a stall from which it failed to recover.

The ill-fated manoeuvre arose especially from makeshift preparations for the exercise and poor coordination between the German and New Zealand crew on board, the Bureau d'Enquetes et d'Analyses (BEA) said after a 22-month inquiry.

But compounding their mistake was a malfunction in two out of three external probes that feed the A320's complex computerised flight system with vital data about air flow.

The plane had been repainted and rinsed by a French maintenance company three days before the test, the investigation found. Water entered these so-called angle of attack (AOA) sensors, causing them to freeze and thus skewing the avionics.

A year later, in 2009, a Rio-to-Paris Air France flight disappeared over the Atlantic with the loss of all 228 people on board. An inquiry found that the plane flew into a thunderstorm, which froze the crucial speed sensors, resulting in the pilots flying blind and leading to a mid-air stall.

Indonesian actress Conchita Caroline had concerns about the doomed Lion Air plane after flying on it the day before. Photo / Supplied

Today a passenger who was on the ill-fated Lion Air aircraft a day before the crash outlined concerns about the plane.

Indonesian actress and TV presenter Conchita Caroline said her flight from Bali to Jakarta struck problems.

As the plane readied for takeoff, an engine seemed to die several times, the air conditioning was faulty and the floor beneath her felt hot to touch.

Lion Air's chief executive Edward Surat said yesterday there was a report of a technical issue from that fight but that had been resolved ''according to procedure" before Flight 610 took off.

Following the crash Boeing's stock price fell by almost 7 per cent. Lion Air is an important customer for its 737s.. . A Boeing Co. warning to 737 Max operators around the globe provides the first clues about how bad data from an airflow sensor might have contributed to the deadly crash of an Indonesian airliner last week.

The bulletin and statements by Indonesian investigators suggest that the pilots on the Lion Air 737 Max 8 were battling the plane as its computers commanded a steep dive during its final moments of flight.

Boeing cautioned that the so-called angle-of-attack sensor can provide false readings in limited circumstances — such as when a plane’s autopilot is switched off — that cause the 737 Max to pitch nose downward. The sensor malfunction can essentially trick the plane into pointing its nose down to gain the speed it thinks it needs to keep flying.

The Boeing directive doesn’t call for operators to conduct new inspections or take other action. It merely stressed that pilots should follow procedures in the flight manual when encountering erroneous data. Following the protocol should be routine for pilots, though may be more challenging in the heat of the moment when equipment is malfunctioning and alarms are sounding.

American aviation regulators followed by issuing an emergency order Wednesday requiring that airlines follow Boeing’s instructions and add information to pilot manuals showing how to diagnose the problem and respond. Carriers will have three days to update their manuals under the order, issued by the Federal Aviation Administration, according to an emailed statement.

The FAA said the problem “could cause the flight crew to have difficulty controlling the airplane, and lead to excessive nose-down attitude, significant altitude loss, and possible impact with terrain.”

The sensor on the Lion Air jet been replaced the day before after it failed on a previous trip, the Indonesia National Transportation Safety Committee said in a briefing Wednesday. The malfunction can cause the plane’s computers to erroneously detect a mid-flight stall in airflow, causing the aircraft to abruptly dive to regain the speed it needs to keep flying.

On a previous flight from Bali to Jakarta, the angle-of-attack sensor feeding the captain’s flight displays registered a 20-degree difference from the device on the copilot’s side of the cockpit, the committee said. Pilots on that flight were able to compensate.

An angle-of-attack sensor that had been removed before that previous flight has been brought to the investigators and will be examined in the U.S., the Indonesian officials said.

It’s still possible the FAA may order Boeing to redesign the equipment or software as investigators piece together details of the Oct. 29 crash, which killed 189 people. The agency said it “will take further appropriate actions depending on the results of the investigation.”

Fresh Questions

The new information about Lion Air Flight 610 raises multiple questions investigators will want to examine on the pilots’ actions, how flight crews were trained and whether the maintenance performed on the system was adequate, said Roger Cox, a former NTSB investigator.

“I would definitely be looking at the man-machine interface and how pilots respond,” said Cox, a former airline pilot who flew earlier versions of the 737 and specialized at the NTSB in cockpit actions.

One of the puzzling things about the accident is that the plane was flying in clear skies during daylight, so pilots should have been able to handle the problems they faced with airspeed and erroneous sensors, Cox said. However, in rare instances, accidents have been caused by what investigators call a “startle factor.”

“If you don’t take the appropriate action because you’re surprised, you can make a serious error,” he said.

The pilots union at Southwest Airlines Co., the biggest customer of the 737 Max, hasn’t received any reports from its members of problems with faulty sensor readings, said Jon Weaks, president of the Southwest Airlines Pilots Association.

The airline confirmed that it hasn’t experienced any of the sensor troubles and said its 26 Max remain operational and no schedule disruption is expected.

United Technologies Corp. supplies the angle-of-attack sensors and indicator for the 737 Max, according to Airframers.net. The company didn’t respond to requests for comment. Honeywell International Inc. provides the air data inertial reference unit.

The Lion Air jetliner plunged into the Java Sea minutes after takeoff from Jakarta airport, nosing downward so suddenly that it may have hit speeds of 600 miles an hour before slamming into the water.

Moments earlier, the pilots radioed a request to return to Jakarta, but never turned back toward the airport, according to Indonesia’s safety commission and flight-tracking data. The agency said the pilots were dealing with an erroneous airspeed indication.

Boeing, which is headquartered in Chicago, said it is cooperating fully and providing technical assistance as the investigation continues. Boeing’s shares rose 1.5 percent to $372.02 at the close of trading in New York. The stock has risen 26 percent this year, the fourth-largest gain on the 30-member Dow Jones Industrial Average.

While modern jetliners primarily operate on autopilot, the computerized system can disengage when airspeed indicators malfunction, forcing pilots to manually fly the aircraft. If there is an “uncommanded nose-down stabilizer trim” on the Max, pilots can counteract it by pushing a switch on their control yoke. But the plane’s computers will resume trying to dive as soon as they release the switch, the Boeing bulletin said.

Flight crews should follow a separate protocol to halt the plane’s potentially dangerous action, according to the bulletin. Pilots are supposed to memorize a procedure to disengage the angle-of-attack inputs to the plane’s computer system. Boeing has delivered 219 Max planes — the latest and most advanced 737 jets — since the models made their commercial debut last year with a Lion Air subsidiary.

The angle-of-attack sensor is intended to measure the angle between air flow and a reference line on the frame or wings so that they maintain lift. If the flow is disrupted by a plane going too slow or climbing too steeply, that can cause an aerodynamic stall and a plane will plummet. However, if the sensor malfunctions, it can cause the plane’s computers to erroneously think it is in a stall — which can then command the aircraft to abruptly dive.

Pilots raise and lower the nose of Boeing jetliners by pushing and pulling on a yoke in the cockpit, which controls panels at the tail known as elevators. In addition, a system known as pitch trim can be changed to prompt nose-up or nose-down movement.

The angle of attack readings are fed into a computer that in some cases will attempt to push down the nose using the pitch trim system. In the early days of the jet age, the pitch trim system was linked to several accidents. If pilots aren’t careful, they can cause severe nose-down trim settings that make it impossible to level a plane.

–With assistance from Kyunghee Park, Anurag Kotoky, Mary Schlangenstein, Justin Bachman and Natasha Rausch.

Related:

Copyright 2024 Bloomberg.

Topics Aviation Aerospace. . . By Stanley Widianto, Ashley Halsey III and Aaron Gregg | Washington Post

JAKARTA, Indonesia – A malfunctioning sensor and an automated response from the aircraft’s software stymied pilots’ efforts to control a doomed Indonesian flight that went careening into the sea last month, according to a preliminary investigative report released Wednesday.

The report, which stops short of determining the cause of the crash or analyzing findings, chronicles the chaotic moments on the Lion Air flight before it crashed into the waters off the coast of Java last month, killing all 189 passengers and crew on board.

It details how sensors and other equipment were checked and fixed before the aircraft’s final flight, but not the “angle of attack” sensor. That measures where the nose is pointing and was showing erroneous readings throughout the short time the plane was airborne.

With the sensor insisting the nose was too high, an automatic feature kicked in, sending the plane plummeting as the pilots wrestled to regain control. Unable to trust their readings, the pilots resorted to asking air traffic control about their speed and altitude.

Lion Air Flight 610 plunged into the Java Sea on Oct. 29 just after taking off from the Indonesian capital, Jakarta, killing the eight crew members and 181 passengers on board, including a child and two infants.

The crash appears to have been caused by a mix of brand new technology and cockpit confusion as the pilots fought to gain altitude after an early-morning takeoff from Jakarta. The flight crew – at an altitude of just 5,000 feet – had very little time to resolve the issue before the plane crashed into the sea at a reported 450 miles per hour.

Though the report contains no conclusion assigning blame, its descriptions of automated systems overtaking the aircraft – leaving pilots both confused and powerless – poses questions for Boeing and Lion Air about whether the cockpit crew was prepared for this scenario. After the Lion Air crash, pilots in the United States accused Boeing of withholding safety information on its new 737 model.

The aircraft’s pilots asked to return to Jakarta just two minutes after takeoff, reporting a “flight-control problem” but not specifying what it was.

Black-box data released by Indonesian investigators showed that the pilots were pulling back on the control column, attempting to raise the plane’s nose, with almost 100 pounds of pressure before they crashed.

The Indonesian National Transportation Safety Committee, which produced the report, also said that Lion Air, a Jakarta-based low-cost airline, should improve its “safety culture.”

No engineer briefed the pilots of the crashed plane on the multiple problems the aircraft experienced on previous flights, and it was up to him to review the maintenance logs.

The report, however, contains no conclusion on who was at fault.

“When it comes to faulting, I don’t know. Our job isn’t to find faults,” National Transportation Safety Committee investigator Nurcahyo Utomo said at a news conference Wednesday.

The aircraft was the most recent incarnation of the venerable Boeing 737, a plane that first flew in 1967 and has gone through multiple iterations before it emerged as the 737 Max.

The 737 Max was equipped with more-powerful engines that are mounted farther forward on the wing, requiring that additional software be added to the autopilot to provide more control.

That software, which has been described as several lines of coding, was identified in the Boeing manual as the maneuvering characteristics augmentation system, or MCAS.

When the sensors transmitted faulty data to the cockpit of Flight 610, the new MCAS system sensed a stall – that point at which planes do not have enough airspeed to create lift – and sought to correct for it by repeatedly pointing the nose of the aircraft down.

A feature in previous 737 models that allowed pilots to manually override an “electric trimming” process – which automatically budges the nose downward to prevent a stall, does not work in Boeing’s 737 Max 8 planes, Boeing explained in a Nov. 7 bulletin.

That same week, the Federal Aviation Administration issued an emergency notice to all airlines that fly the 737 Max, warning them that erroneous sensor inputs “could cause the flight crew to have difficulty controlling the airplane,” leading to “possible impact with terrain.”

The deviation probably was caused by what is called a “runaway stabilizer.” Stabilizers are essentially those small wings on either side at the tail end of the plane. They each have flaps – called elevators – that help control the elevation of the plane.

In case of a runaway stabilizer, pilots are instructed in the cockpit checklist to hold the control column firmly, disengaging the autopilot that, in this case, contained the MCAS program. Next, they are told, disengage the auto throttle and manually fly the plane.

“This corner of the performance charts is called the ‘coffin corner,’ ” said Mary Schiavo, an aviation lawyer and former inspector general of the U.S. Transportation Department, “and good pilot training teaches you how to get out of coffin corner, but did these pilots realize the plane itself was putting them in coffin corner? Apparently not.”

It is not clear whether the pilots attempted the runaway stabilizer procedure.

Unions representing pilots at Southwest and American airlines said they were not properly informed about the new system during training.

“We did not know this was on the Max models,” Southwest Airlines Pilots Association President Jon Weaks told The Washington Post in a Nov. 13 interview, referring to a new automated flight-control feature.

The prospect that a runaway autopilot system could have contributed to the crash has already been the subject of at least one lawsuit implicating Boeing, with the father of a Lion Air Flight 610 crash victim filing suit recently.

Soerjanto Tjahjono, who heads Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee, said last week that the plane’s black box showed that “the technical problem was the airspeed, or the speed of the plane.” (The plane’s cockpit voice recorder has not been recovered.)

“There were four flights that experienced problems with the airspeed indicator,” Tjahjono said. The angle-of-attack sensor contributes to the airspeed readings.

In testimony before the Indonesian parliament last week, Utomo, the investigator, said that the anti-stall system had activated on the plane as it flew into Jakarta the night before the crash but that the pilots managed to shut it off.

At the news conference Wednesday, Utomo said the plane, on both the doomed flight and the previous flight from Bali to Jakarta, had experienced a stick shaker – “a warning that showed that the plane was going to stall,” he said.

The committee report said differing data between the sensors appeared rectified by cleaning an electrical plug the night before the crash, and a “test on the ground found the problem had been solved.”

But it was not, the report concludes, because when the plane took off shortly after 6 a.m. the following morning, the two flight-speed sensors did not agree on the aircraft’s speed.

The 737 Max is the most popular plane in Boeing history, with 453 delivered so far and 4,671 on order. It is flown or is on order by close to 40 airlines, with Lion Air in the process of receiving more than 200 of the jets.

Boeing said Tuesday that it “continues to work closely with the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board as technical advisers to support the ongoing investigation” by the Indonesian authorities.

The flights of Indonesia’s airlines to U.S. destinations were banned in the decade before 2016 because their safety record was considered abysmal by U.S. standards. The crash of the Lion Air flight was the worst in Indonesia since 1997, when 234 people died on the national airline Garuda in North Sumatra.

Halsey and Gregg reported from Washington. Shibani Mahtani in Hong Kong contributed to this report.

A previous version of this story incorrectly described the general reasons for a plane to stall during flight.. . (Bloomberg) — The Lion Air jet that crashed into the Java Sea off Indonesia earlier this week had experienced problems with the sensors used to calculate altitude and speed on its previous flight, an issue that could help explain why the plane dove into the water.

Pilots on the nearly new Boeing Co. 737 Max 8 reported the issue after flying from Denpasar to Jakarta the night before the accident, Lion Air spokesman Danang Mandala Prihantoro said Wednesday. The instruments were checked by maintenance workers overnight and the plane was cleared to fly, Prihantoro said.

While it will be days or weeks before definitive information emerges in the crash shortly after takeoff with 189 people aboard, discrepancies in speed and altitude readings can cause confusion on the cockpit and have led to accidents in the past, including the 2009 crash of an Air France plane in the Atlantic Ocean.

Flight-tracking data before the two-month old Lion Air jet crashed showed the plane was varying its altitude and speed, a possible indication that the pilots weren’t getting accurate information from the aircraft’s air-pressure sensors.

Erroneous sensors could be an explanation for the flight track data, said John Cox, president of Safety Operating Systems and a former airline pilot. But Cox and others cautioned that it’s too soon to say what happened on the Lion Air flight and some of the flight data — such as speeds that weren’t extreme and none of the highly abrupt maneuvers that preceded the Air France jet’s loss of control — may suggest some other cause.

Indonesia’s National Search and Rescue Agency has picked up signals from so-called pingers on the Flight JT610’s crash-proof flight recorders.

“We have located the area where we strongly believe the plane’s black box is located. The large parts of the aircraft should be nearby,” National Military Chief Hadi Tjahjanto said.

Inspections of the 737 Max 8 aircraft operated by Lion Air and Garuda Indonesia since the accident found no technical issues, according to a statement by the country’s Transport Ministry. A review of maintenance documents found no additional issues were reported on the airspeed and altimeter system in the past 3 months.

Investigators from around the world, including a team from Boeing, are onsite poring over evidence. For now, the planemaker has told 737 Max operators that it doesn’t recommend they take any action at this time.

Even with modern GPS tracking, planes need to calculate their precise speed through the air. To determine airspeed — which can vary substantially compared to the speed over the ground due to winds — aircraft rely on Pitot tubes which measure the air rushing into them.

By comparing that pressure against the ambient air pressure — which is obtained by what are known as static ports — aircraft can determine airspeed.

If either of the pressure sensors are blocked, it can cause erroneous readings. In the case of the Air France flight, investigators concluded that a high-altitude ice storm clogged the Pitot tubes.

Jetliners are equipped with three separate airspeed sensor systems as backups. If one goes bad, pilots are trained to check the other readings and disregard the one that’s incorrect.

United Technologies Corp. is a supplier of the systems to the 737 Max, according to Airframer.com, a website that tracks suppliers of aircraft components. A company representative said she wasn’t immediately able to confirm whether its equipment was on the Lion Air plane.

Lion Air and investigators haven’t provided details about the issue on the previous flight Sunday night. Data provided by flight tracking company FlightRadar24 showed that the jet took off and reached an altitude of 5,550 feet (1,692 meters), then dropped to 4,625 feet, an unusual altitude loss at a time when aircraft normally climb steadily.

The plane then resumed its climb, but never exceeded 28,000 feet. Jetliners usually don’t fly below 30,000 feet because cruising at the lower altitudes is less fuel efficient. However, planes with partially malfunctioning altitude sensors aren’t allowed above 28,000 feet.

“Every aircraft that we have will go through transit, pre-flight and post-flight checks,” said Lion Air’s Prihantoro. “We are conducting inspection and maintenance if needed on every aircraft.”

Air France

Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee, which is leading the investigation, has interviewed pilots from the previous flight, Ony Soerjo Wibowo, an investigator, told a news conference on Tuesday.

In the Air France accident, investigators concluded that the Pitot tubes had become clogged with ice and all three of the plane’s speed indicators failed at different times, according to the final report of France’s Office of Investigation and Analysis.

The routine flight from Rio de Janeiro to Paris was interrupted with a cacophony of alarms and confusing information. Their autopilot disconnected, speed indicators went haywire and warnings sounded indicating they were going too slow. “We haven’t got a good display,” one of the pilots said, according to the accident report.

Other Crashes

Completely flummoxed, the pilots abruptly climbed and then lost control, allowing the plane to plunge for about four minutes until it slammed into the water.

While such failures happen fairly frequently and pilots should be able to continue flying the plane until the problem resolves itself, a handful of airline accidents such as the Air France crash show they can be confusing if pilots are startled and don’t react properly.

A charter flight leaving the Dominican Republic in 1996 crashed, killing 189 people, after the captain’s airspeed became inaccurate. While it was never proven, a wasp’s nest in the Pitot tube was suspected as the reason for the error.

An Aeroperu flight that crashed in 1996, killing 70, was blamed by the Peruvian government on tape that had been left over the static ports. Shortly after takeoff, pilots received nearly simultaneous cockpit warnings that they were going too fast, too slow and too close to the ground, according to the investigation.

While it’s too early to know if airspeed indicators will prove to be related to Monday’s accident, the possibility underscores the need for better and more consistent pilot training, said David Greenberg, an industry consultant and former operations executive at Delta Air Lines Inc.

Greenberg, who also served as chief operating officer at Korean Air Lines Co. Ltd., said U.S. airlines drill pilots for such contingencies in the classroom and flight simulators.

Partially as a result of the Air France crash, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration in recent years revamped pilot training for how to handle unusual speeds and cases in which the plane goes out of control. It’s now common for airline pilots to receive simulator training on how to handle a failure of the plane’s speed indicators.

A veteran U.S. airline captain recalled a recent training exercise in the simulator in which the plane’s airspeed became inaccurate. The problem was hard to detect and occurred simultaneously with other control issues, said the pilot, who asked not to be named because he wasn’t authorized to speak by his airline.

The copilot’s speed readings were accurate and control was turned over to the junior pilot, but the captain’s instruments continued to behave erratically, which was distracting, the pilot said.. . . The FAA has issued an emergency directive to anyone flying the Boeing 737 MAX, the type of plane that crashed in the Lion Air Flight JH 610 incident, related to the faulty sensors that reportedly fed bad information to the pilots. Meanwhile, investigators have reported that the plane received a replacement angle-of-attack sensor (a system that measures whether the plane's nose is too high relative to the current of air) the day before the deadly crash.

As Bloomberg reported earlier this week, Boeing issued a bulletin to 737 MAX operators warning them that faulty inputs from airflow sensors could have contributed to the Lion Air crash. The Boeing statement gave few details, saying that “the investigation is ongoing.” The FAA's directive backs up that bulletin by giving anyone who flies the 737 MAX three days, starting Wednesday, to revise their airplane flight manual for that model.

The FAA said it was taking the action to “address possible erroneous angle of attack inputs” that could put the plane in a sudden dive. The FAA said airline operators need to revise the manual “to give crew Horizontal stabilizer trim procedures to follow under certain conditions." In the U.S., the order affects American, Southwest, and United, which together operate 45 MAX jets.

Here's the official statement:



“Boeing has released a Flight Crew Operations Manual Bulletin regarding the potential for erroneous angle of attack input on 737 Max aircraft. The FAA plans to mandate the Flight Crew Operations Manual Bulletin by issuing an Airworthiness Directive (AD). The FAA continues to work closely with Boeing, and as a part of the investigative team on the Indonesia Lion Air accident, will take further appropriate actions depending on the results of the investigation. The FAA has alerted affected domestic carriers and foreign airworthiness authorities who oversee air carriers that use the 737 MAX of the agency’s forthcoming action."



The new revelation—that the doomed 737 received a new sensor after a flight on October 28, the day before the deadly crash—adds to the growing evidence of a serious problem with the sensors and flight data being fed to the crew of Lion Air 610. Data downloaded from the flight data recorder, which was recovered by divers searching the underwater crash site, have revealed a series of glitches in three flights prior to the crash that gave flawed airspeed and other information to the cockpit.

If AOA sensors fail, it can cause the plane’s computers to incorrectly show the plane is heading into an aerodynamic stall—which, in turn, can put the jet into a sudden dive to restore airspeed.

“It’s too early to tell if the sensors caused the accident,” said John Goglia, an aviation safety expert and former member of the National Transportation Safety Board. He said that sensor equipment has become more automated with each new generation of aircraft, and that, in turn, introduces a new risk.

“This could be a training issue,” he said. “The automation keeps marching forward and this is most advanced model that Boeing has built.” It’s still unclear whether the issue is one of an actual flaw, or a procedure that wasn’t correctly followed.. CNN —

Problems were reported on a Lion Air jet that crashed into the sea off Jakarta even after technicians replaced a sensor on board the aircraft, investigators said.

Indonesian authorities confirmed Wednesday that the angle of attack (AOA) sensor was replaced after a flight from Manado, in North Sulawesi to Denpasar, Bali on October 28. The Boeing 737 MAX 8 then made another flight to Jakarta that same day, and the pilots reported further problems.

All 189 people on board Flight 610 died when the new Boeing 737 MAX 8 crashed into the sea on October 29, 13 minutes after taking off from Jakarta on a short flight to Pangkal Pinang on the Indonesian island of Bangka.

Investigators said the jet experienced problems on its last four flights – including, crucially, the flight that crashed, according to Soerjanto Tjahjono, the head of the National Transportation Safety Committee (KNKT).

Boeing released an operational bulletin on Wednesday, warning all airlines about how to address any erroneous readings related to the AOA sensor. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) later issued its own directive that advised pilots about how to respond to similar problems.

Search for voice recorder

Almost two weeks after the crash, authorities are still searching for the plane’s cockpit voice recorder (CVR), which is believed to be buried under deep mud. If found, it should reveal what happened in the cockpit in the final seconds of the flight.

Investigators are already examining the flight data recorder that was pulled off the sea bed, some 30 meters under water, on November 1.

A relative of one of the crash victims tosses flower petals from an Indonesian Navy ship on Tuesday, November 6. Tatan Syuflana/AP Victims' families and colleagues react on a Navy ship as they're ferried to the crash site on November 6. Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images An Indonesian official examines a turbine engine from the plane on Sunday, November 4. BEAWIHARTA/REUTERS People in Jakarta grieve over the coffin of a relative on November 4. Ed Wray/Getty Images Indonesian Navy divers recover a flight data recorder on Thursday, November 1. Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images Families of the victims look through personal items that were recovered from the wreckage. Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images A police officer arranges shoes recovered during search operations. Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images A Navy ship arrives at a search area in the waters of Karawang. Edgar Su/Reuters A relative of a passenger cries at a Jakarta hospital on Tuesday, October 30. Family members have been providing authorities with DNA samples to help identify victims of the crash. Fauzy Chaniago/AP Officials transport a body bag in Jakarta. Willy Kurniawan/Reuters Indonesian President Joko Widodo inspects debris. Edgar Su/Reuters Victims' relatives embrace at a police hospital in Jakarta. Fauzy Chaniago/AP Soldiers drag ashore an inflatable raft containing debris from the plane. Antara Foto/Reuters A wallet is seen in the water where the plane went down. Achmad Ibrahim/AP A relative of a passenger cries at a hospital in Jakarta. Willy Kurniawan/Reuters President Widodo (front row, second from right) tours the operations center in Jakarta where debris is laid out. Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images Police work to identify personal belongings that are believed to be from the plane's wreckage. Edgar Su/Reuters A police officer studies a map in the search-and-rescue command center. Edgar Su/Reuters A diver with the Indonesian Navy enters the water off the north coast of Karawang. Beawiharta/Reuters Rescue workers carry a body that was recovered from the waters near Jakarta on October 29. Jepayona Delita/Barcroft Media/Getty Images A woman in Pangkal Pinang prays as she and others wait for news on October 29. Hadi Sutrisno/AP People gather on the beach as a rescue team prepares to leave the coast of Karawang. Beawiharta/Reuters Wreckage from the plane lies at a port in Jakarta. Willy Kurniawan/Reuters Bagus Sunjoyo, head of airport authority for Soekarno-Hatta International Airport, speaks to members of the media during a news conference. Rony Zakaria/Bloomberg/Getty Images People watch a rescue team as a helicopter flies overhead. Beawiharta/Reuters People look at the passenger manifest for Lion Air Flight JT 610. Rony Zakaria/Bloomberg/Getty Images Merdiana Harahap is consoled in Medan, Indonesia. Her husband was on the plane. Ivan Damanik/AFP/Getty Images In photos: Lion Air plane crashes off Indonesia Prev Next

KNKT is sending a dredger to help with the search for the cockpit voice recorder. It’s expected to reach the crash site in the next two days. After initially hearing a “ping” from the recorder on Saturday, diving teams can no longer detect a signal from the device.

“Our obstacle is thick mud that’s buried the CVR,” said Haryo Satmiko, deputy head of the KNKT. “With this special ship we will suck the mud there and then sweep the area.”

Investigators are continuing to interview the pilots, crew and technicians who were involved in the previous flights made by the aircraft in the days prior to the crash.

Unscrambling the jargon

In its statement on Wednesday, Boeing said that the Indonesian transport committee had indicated that Flight 610 had “experienced erroneous input from one of its AOA sensors.”

An AOA sensor is an instrument, similar to a small wind vane, that sits outside the plane just below the cockpit and sends information to its computers about the angle of the plane’s nose relative to the oncoming air. The sensor helps to determine whether the plane is about to stall and dive.

“It is very important because it tells them if the plane is flying at a too-high angle of attack, which can lead to an aerodynamic wing stall (loss of lift),” said aviation analyst and editor-in-chief of Airlineratings.com, Geoffrey Thomas.

CNN’s aviation correspondent Richard Quest said the aircraft receives information from the sensors and responds accordingly.

“The plane’s computers were getting erroneous information from external sensors. That caused them to do certain things such as push the nose down. The only way you can handle this is to switch the computer off,” he said.

Video Ad Feedback Lion Air black box recovered, officials say 03:49 - Source: CNN

Problems with air speed indicators

Investigators who analyzed the jet’s flight data recorder (FDR) after the October 29 crash said there were problems with the air speed indicator on the past three flights before the crash.

The airspeed indicator is like a speedometer and tells the pilot how fast the plane is moving through the air. It does this by gathering data from the plane’s pitot tube and the static port, which essentially compare differentials in the air pressure to arrive at the plane’s speed and the altitude.

After problems were reported with the air speed indicator, the AOA sensor was replaced by a Lion Air technician in Bali before the plane departed for Jakarta on its penultimate flight.

Passengers on that flight told CNN that the plane experienced a significant drop in altitude shortly after takeoff. “After 10 minutes in the air the plane dropped as if it was losing power. People panicked. It dropped about 400 feet,” passenger Robbi Gaharu said.

Once in Jakarta, a Lion Air technician checked the plane again and gave it the green light to fly on its final flight, from Jakarta to Pangkal Pinang.

Lion Air Group Managing Director Captain Daniel Putut Kuncoro Adi told CNN on Wednesday that Lion Air strictly follows Boeing’s guidance for operating the 737 MAX 8s, as laid out in the maintenance manual book.

“Pilots write in the logbook about the problem they had in the flight, then our technicians fix it and write (what) they did in the logbook,” said the managing director, adding that technical conversations between pilots and technicians regarding the aircraft are written and signed in a document called the Aircraft Flight and Maintenance Log.

Quest says investigators will be looking at a combination of factors that could have caused the crash.

“A crash is always a series of events. Fundamentally the issue is going to be how those pilots flew the plane as the conditions arose,” he said.

What does Boeing and the FAA say?

On Wednesday, Boeing said it had issued an “Operations Manual Bulletin” advising airline operators how to address erroneous cockpit readings.

A spokesperson for the aircraft manufacturer wouldn’t disclose to CNN whether the directive was issued to operators of all Boeing aircraft, or just those who fly 737 MAX 8 planes, the same model as Flight 610.

The directive points operators “to existing flight crew procedures to address circumstances where there is erroneous input from an AOA sensor,” the statement said.

The ill-fated Lion Air Flight 610's flight data recorder was recovered from the Java Sea on November 1. PRADITA UTAMA/AFP/Getty Images

Following Boeing’s bulletin, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) on Wednesday issued an airworthiness directive to Boeing 737 MAX 8 crews if they experience the same problems that brought down Lion Air Flight 610.

“These erroneous inputs can potentially make the horizontal stabilizers repeatedly pitch the nose of the airplane downward, making the aircraft difficult to control,” the directive said.

It continued that, “The FAA has alerted affected domestic carriers and foreign airworthiness authorities who oversee air carriers who use the 737 MAX.”

The FAA directive does not acknowledge an issue with the entire fleet of 737 MAX 8 airplanes and there have been no reported comparable issues in the US.

Boeing said it is involved in the ongoing investigation with KNKT and other government authorities into the Lion Air crash and “continues to cooperate fully and provide technical assistance.”. JAKARTA, Indonesia (AP) — Pilots fought against an automated system that pitched a Boeing jetliner’s nose down repeatedly because of a faulty sensor until they finally lost control and plunged into the Java Sea last month, Indonesian investigators said Wednesday.

At a news conference, safety officials said they were still struggling to understand why the plane crashed, killing all 189 people on board.

The National Transportation Safety Commission’s Nurcahyo Utomo said investigators were trying to figure out from interviews with engineers why they certified that the Boeing 737 MAX 8 was airworthy and whether they had followed required maintenance procedures. Pilots of previous flights had reported problems with control systems on the brand-new jet.

The board issued a preliminary report that stopped short of placing blame for the crash — the investigation is continuing — but it provided new details about the pilots’ struggle to fly the highly automated jet and Lion Air’s inability to fix problems with sensors on the plane.

Sensors that measure speed were flushed and checked, and an electrical plug was cleaned before the fatal flight. Mechanics, however, did not check sensors that measure whether the nose of the plane is pointing up or down.

An “angle of attack” sensor gave faulty readings throughout the short flight, triggering a system that automatically pointed the plane’s nose down more than two dozen times, with pilots responding by manually fighting to correct the pitch. Pilots even asked air traffic controllers to tell them how fast and high they were flying.

The malfunctions and warnings from the plane’s control system appeared to overwhelm the pilots almost as soon as the jet became airborne, said another investigator, Ony Suryo Wibowo.

“The problem is if multiple malfunctions occur all at once, which one should be prioritized?” Wibowo said.

In a statement following release of the report, U.S.-based Boeing declared that the MAX, its newest plane, is safe. The manufacturer played up the possibility of pilot error.

Boeing noted that the crew of the plane’s previous flight one day earlier had responded correctly to the automatic nose-down pitch and flew the plane manually. They also ran safety checklists. The preliminary report does not say whether pilots on the deadly flight took those steps, Boeing pointed out.

Boeing has said that the procedure to correct an automatic nose-down pitch is in the plane’s operating manual and pilots should have known about it.

Several experts said, however, that Boeing likely will have to consider changes in the new anti-stall system, perhaps developing an algorithm to disregard sensor readings that appear off-base.

The report offered new details on persistent problems with sensors on the Lion Air jet and the airline’s efforts to fix them.

John Cox, a safety consultant and former airline pilot, said Lion Air should have taken the troubled plane on a maintenance test flight.

“I don’t think the airplane was ready for passenger service because they had not validated that they had fixed the problem,” he said.

Searchers have not yet recovered the plane’s cockpit voice recorder, which could tell investigators what the pilots were doing — or failing to do — to regain control of the plane during the brief, erratic flight.

The report by Indonesia’s safety commission did not draw conclusions about why the crew lost control of the plane, but it repeated earlier recommendations that pilots be better versed in emergency procedures and aware of past aircraft problems. They recommended that Lion Air, a fast-growing low-cost airline based in Jakarta, ensures that pilots follow proper procedures “to improve the safety culture.”

Mary Schiavo, a former inspector general of the U.S. Department of Transportation, said the preliminary report offered a road map of final recommendations that are likely to emerge from the investigation.

“They will be looking for more precise reporting of problems (by pilots), and certainly a better maintenance response,” she said.

Peter Lemme, an expert in aviation and satellite communications and a former Boeing engineer who wrote an analysis of the data on his blog, compared the scene in the cockpit to “a deadly game of tag” in which the plane pointed down, the pilots countered by manually aiming the nose higher, only for the sequence to repeat about five seconds later.

That happened 26 times during the 11-minute flight, but pilots failed to recognize what was happening and follow the known procedure for countering incorrect activation of the automated safety system, Lemme told The Associated Press.

Lemme said he was troubled that there weren’t easy checks to see if sensor information was correct, that the crew of the fatal flight apparently wasn’t warned about the problems on previous flights and that the Lion Air jet wasn’t fully repaired after those flights.

“Had they fixed the airplane, we would not have had the accident,” he said. “Every accident is a combination of events, so there is disappointment all around here,” he said.

The U.S. National Transportation Safety Board and Boeing experts are helping the Indonesian investigators.

Boeing has a great deal at stake in defending its plane.

More than 200 MAX jets have been delivered to airlines around the world. Pilots at American Airlines and Southwest Airlines complained this month that they had not been given all information about the new automated anti-stall safety system on the MAX.

Boeing shares fell 14 percent in the last three weeks through Tuesday, as investigators focused on the possible role of faulty sensor readings on the new plane. They rallied on Wednesday, however, to close up $15.47, or 4.9 percent, at $333.50, the stock’s best day in 10 months.

___

Koenig reported from Dallas, Texas.. Pilots fought against an automated system that pitched a Boeing jetliner's nose down repeatedly because of a faulty sensor until they finally lost control and plunged into the Java Sea last month, Indonesian investigators said Wednesday.

By NINIEK KARMINI and DAVID KOENIG

JAKARTA, Indonesia (AP) — Pilots fought against an automated system that pitched a Boeing jetliner's nose down repeatedly because of a faulty sensor until they finally lost control and plunged into the Java Sea last month, Indonesian investigators said Wednesday.

At a news conference, safety officials said they were still struggling to understand why the plane crashed, killing all 189 people on board.

The National Transportation Safety Commission's Nurcahyo Utomo said investigators were trying to figure out from interviews with engineers why they certified that the Boeing 737 MAX 8 was airworthy and whether they had followed required maintenance procedures. Pilots of previous flights had reported problems with control systems on the brand-new jet.

The board issued a preliminary report that stopped short of declaring a probable cause of the crash — the investigation is continuing — but it provided new details about the pilots' struggle to fly the highly automated jet and Lion Air's inability to fix problems with sensors on the plane.

Sensors that measure speed were flushed and checked, and an electrical plug was cleaned before the fatal flight. Mechanics, however, did not check a sensor that measures whether the nose of the plane is pointing up or down.

That "angle of attack" sensor gave faulty readings throughout the short flight, triggering a system that automatically pointed the plane's nose down more than two dozen times, with pilots responding by manually fighting to correct the pitch. Pilots even asked air traffic controllers to tell them how fast and high they were flying.

The malfunctions and warnings from the plane's control system appeared to overwhelm the pilots almost as soon as the jet became airborne, said another investigator, Ony Suryo Wibowo.

"The problem is if multiple malfunctions occur all at once, which one should be prioritized?" Wibowo said.

In a statement following release of the report, U.S.-based Boeing declared that the MAX, its newest plane, is safe. The manufacturer played up the possibility of pilot error.

Boeing noted that the crew of the plane's previous flight one day earlier had responded correctly to the automatic nose-down pitch and flew the plane manually. They also ran safety checklists. The preliminary report does not say whether pilots on the deadly flight took those steps, Boeing pointed out.

Boeing has said that the procedure to correct an automatic nose-down pitch is in the plane's operating manual and pilots should have known about it.

Searchers have not yet recovered the plane's cockpit voice recorder, which could tell investigators what the pilots were doing — or failing to do — to regain control of the plane during the brief, erratic flight.

The report by Indonesia's safety commission repeated earlier recommendations made just after the disaster that pilots be better versed in emergency procedures and aware of past aircraft problems. They recommended that Lion Air, a fast-growing low-cost airline based in Jakarta, ensure that pilots follow proper procedures "to improve the safety culture."

Mary Schiavo, a former inspector general of the U.S. Department of Transportation, said the preliminary report offered a road map of final recommendations that are likely to emerge from the investigation.

"They will be looking for more precise reporting of problems (by pilots), and certainly a better maintenance response," she said.

Peter Lemme, an expert in aviation and satellite communications and a former Boeing engineer who wrote an analysis of the data on his blog, compared the scene in the cockpit to "a deadly game of tag" in which the plane pointed down, the pilots countered by manually aiming the nose higher, only for the sequence to repeat about five seconds later.

That happened 26 times during the 11-minute flight, but pilots failed to recognize what was happening and follow the known procedure for countering incorrect activation of the automated safety system, Lemme told The Associated Press.

Lemme said he was troubled that there weren't easy checks to see if sensor information was correct, that the crew of the fatal flight apparently wasn't warned about the problems on previous flights and that the Lion Air jet wasn't fully repaired after those flights.

"Had they fixed the airplane, we would not have had the accident," he said. "Every accident is a combination of events, so there is disappointment all around here," he said.

The U.S. National Transportation Safety Board and Boeing experts are helping the Indonesian investigators.

Boeing has a great deal at stake in defending its plane.

More than 200 MAX jets have been delivered to airlines around the world. Pilots at American Airlines and Southwest Airlines complained this month that they had not been given all information about the new automated anti-stall safety system on the MAX.

Boeing shares fell 14 percent in the last three weeks through Tuesday, as investigators focused on the possible role of faulty sensor readings on the new plane. In afternoon trading Wednesday, the shares were up $13.60, or 4.3 percent, to $331.63.

___

Koenig reported from Dallas, Texas.. Photo by Gary Lopater on Unsplash

Present day Air travel is one of the safest modes of travel. Statistics from the US Department of Transportation show that in 2007 and 2016 there were 11 fatalities per trillion miles of commercial air travel. This is in stark contrasts to the 7,864 fatalities per trillion miles of travel on the highway ( You can check the statistics here: fatalities and miles of travel per mode of transport). Incremental improvements to air travel is a marvel of technical innovation. However, when an aircraft accident does occur, we are forced to take notice due to the magnitude of a single event.

Air travel today is at a level of technical maturity that when a plane crashes by accident (i.e not due to man-made causes like terrorism or misfiring of missiles), then it is surprisingly due not to pilot error or physical equipment failure but rather because of a computer error. That is, an aircraft accident is caused by a software bug.

Everyone today is intimately familiar with software bugs. Microsoft blue screen of death and the use of ctrl-alt-delete have been burned into our experiences. Even in better designed operating systems that we find in smartphones, it’s is not uncommon to force a reboot. This is much less common that we often have to look up the procedure, but it does happen nevertheless.

Software is notoriously difficult to make bug free. It is the nature of the beast. This is because, to build bug-free software systems, we need to explicitly list all the scenarios that can go wrong and how, and then test our software for those conditions. Unfortunately, that list tends to be unbounded if our designs don’t restrict the scope of a software’s applicability. In short, software developers are able to manage the unbounded complexity by narrowing the scope of applicability. That is why even the most sophisticated “artificial intelligent” applications work well in the most narrow of areas. It is very easy to get frustrated by the limitations of voice assistants like Alexa. That’s because AI technology has not reached the level of maturity that is required for open-ended general conversation. In short, bug-free depends fundamentally on a narrow scope of application and extensive testing within this narrow scope.

As we build more sophisticated software that has higher degrees of complexity, we need to understand the scope of an application and an ever-increasing scope demands more on the testing of these systems. Thus to understand this complexity better, we need to understand the kinds of automation we are building.

As I mentioned earlier, the USDOT shows that there were over 37,000 fatalities in highway accidents in 2017 alone. Thus it makes logical sense to understand how automation affects the safety of road vehicles. The Society of Automation Engineering (SAE) has an international standard which defines six levels of driving automation (SAE J3016). This is a useful framework for classifying the levels of automation in domains outside that of cars. A broader prescription is as follows:

Level 0 (Manual Process)

The absence of any automation.

Level 1 (Attended Process)

Users are aware of the initiation and completion of the performance of each automated task. The user may undo a task in the event of incorrect execution. Users, however, are responsible for the correct sequencing of tasks.

Level 2 (Attended Multiple Processes)

Users are aware of the initiation and completion of a composite of tasks. The user, however, is not responsible for the correct sequencing of tasks. An example will be the booking of a hotel, car, and flight. The exact ordering of the booking may not be a concern of the user. However, failure of the performance of this task may require more extensive manual remedial actions. An unfortunate example of a failed remedial action is the re-accommodation of United Airlines’ paying customer.

Level 3 (Unattended Process)

Users are only notified in exceptional situations and are required to do the work in these conditions. An example of this is in systems that continuously monitor the security of a network. Practitioners take action depending on the severity of an event.

Level 4 (Intelligent Process)

Users are responsible for defining the end goals of automation, however, all aspects of the process execution, as well as the handling of in-flight exceptional conditions, are handled by the automation. The automation is capable of performing appropriate compensating action in events of in-flight failure. The user however is still responsible for identifying the specific context in which automation can be safely applied to.

Level 5 (Fully Automated Process)

This is a final and future state where human involvement is no longer required in the processes. This, of course, may not be the final level because it does not assume that the process is capable of optimizing itself to make improvements.

Level 6 (Self Optimizing Process)

This is automation that requires no human involvement and is also capable of improving itself over time. This level goes beyond the SAE requirements but may be required in certain high-performance competitive environments such as Robocar races and stock trading.

The automobiles of today have extremely sophisticated software that controls many parts of the functioning of the system. This software works at many levels and at each level the risks are different. Some software works at an extremely narrow scope that we are unaware that it is operating. So for example, a car’s fuel injection system is, in fact, fully automated. We can say this about many of the functions of a car that deals with its engine performance. So for example, many car enthusiasts buy programmers and chips that provide after-market tweaks on a car’s performance characteristics. Failure of any of these kinds of systems can still be fatal. SAE’s standards described above however apply to driving automation and not engine automation. There is a stark difference in automation that affect steering and automation that maintains the smooth running of engines.

Automation such as traction control or car stabilization does affect steering. These are engaged in exceptional narrow conditions to ensure greater passenger safety. Controlled behavior is injected in a situation so that a driver can gain better control of a vehicle that he otherwise could not have done so himself. In this context, a driver is actually momentarily not controlling the car.

There have been many cases of planes falling from the skies due to software bugs. My earliest memory of this kind of a catastrophe is Lauda Air Flight 004 in May 1991. This is when one of the engines reverse trusters engaged in mid-flight forcing the plane to spiral out of control and crash. There was no official conclusion as to the cause, however, the aviation writer Macarthur Job said that “had that Boeing 767 been of an earlier version of the type, fitted with engines that were controlled mechanically rather than electronically, then that accident could not have happened.”

More recently, there is the case of Air France 447 in 2009. The official conclusion was that there was a “temporary inconsistency between the measured speeds, likely as a result of the obstruction of the pitot tubes by ice crystals, causing autopilot disconnection and reconfiguration.” The verdict was that the human pilots were eventually part of the fault due to their inability to react appropriately to the anomalous situation. To say this differently, the pilots received incorrect information from the instrumentation and thus took inappropriate action to stabilize the plane.

There are other cases of computer caused failures. Qantas flight 72, it was determined that the CPU of the air data inertial reference unit (ADIRU) corrupted the angle of attack (AOA) data. Malaysia Air 124 that plunged 200 feet in midflight. The instrumentation displayed that the plane was “going too fast and too slow simultaneously”.

In general, it is the responsibility for the pilots to properly perform compensating actions in the case of equipment failure (known as alternate law). The point though is that computer error due to equipment failure should be no different from regular equipment error and it is the responsibility of the pilots to take appropriate measures. Typically, on equipment error, the autopilot is disengaged and the plane is to be flown manually. This is Level 3 (unattended process) automation where the scope when automation is in play is explicit. In Level 3, a pilot is made aware of an exceptional condition and takes manual control of the plane.

In Level 4 (intelligent process), a pilot must be able to recognize the exceptional condition and is able to specify when automation is applicable. Today, we have self-driving cars that are deployed in narrow applications. We have cars that can self-park and we have cars that can drive in good weather conditions on the highway. These are Level 4 automation where is up to the judgment of the driver to engage the automation. Autopilot in planes are Level 4 automation and is engaged in contexts of low complexity.

Then there is the case of Boeing’s 737 Max 8’s MCAS. This I will argue is a Level 5 automation, this is a fully automated process wherein it is expected to function in all scenarios. Like electronics that control engine performance, fully automated processes aren’t generally problematic, however, when you involve driving (or steering for planes) then it opens up the question of the maturity of this level of automation.

Airbus has what is called ‘Alpha Protection’:

“Alpha protection” software is built into every Airbus aircraft to prevent the aircraft from exceeding its performance limits in angle of attack, and kicks in automatically when those limits are reached.

From the definition, Alpha protection is automation that is always measuring, however, it isn’t always active. It is like a speed limiter that exits in cars today, it is constantly measuring, but is activated only when measurements exceed thresholds. However, what happens when the measurements are incorrect due to faulty sensors? One could argue that this might have been what happened to Air France 447. That is, the automation became active when the pilots did not expect it. Faulty sensors are always problematic, but faulty sensors that can trigger automated behavior can be extremely dangerous.

The Boeing 737 Max 8 has a system known as Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS). The business motivation behind MCAS is itself quite revealing. Apparently, it is analogous to a software patch that attempts to fix a physical flaw of the aircraft. The Boeing 737 aircraft, introduced in 1968, is an extremely mature and reliable aircraft. The 737 is the best selling aircraft in the world, selling over 10,000 aircraft since its inception. It is has been favored by many short-haul budget airlines that have risen in the past decade. Its main competitor in the Airbus A320, where over 8,000 planes have been delivered since its inception in 1988.

In 2008, a joint American-French company CFM launched a more fuel and cost-efficient engine known as the Leap engine. Airbus fitted their new planes (Airbus A320neo) with this new engine. The reason behind the economy of the Leap engine is due to its much larger air intake diameter.

To be competitive, the Max 8, was retrofitted also with this new engine. However, unlike the A320neo, there was not enough ground clearance for the Leap engine. To compensate for this problem, Boeing reduced the distance between the engine and the underside of the wing. This, however, had the effect of changing the center of mass of the plane. The Max 8 now had the dynamic tendency of raising its nose and as a consequence increasing the risk of a stall.

To paper over this tendency, Boeing developed MCAS. The purpose of MCAS is that it is software dedicated to compensating for this flaw:

Boeing engineers, in turn, came up with another makeshift solution. They developed a software that would work in the background. As soon as the nose of the aircraft pointed upward too steeply, the system would automatically activate the tailplane and bring the aircraft back to a safe cruising plane. The pilots wouldn’t even notice the software’s intervention — at least that was the idea.

Employing software to paper over a plane’s natural instability is not new. Many of the more advanced fighter jets are designed to be unstable to ensure greater maneuverability. The fighter pilots are also trained to anticipate the peculiar flight characteristics of their planes. In contrast, there have been many complaints that pilots of the Max 8 were not properly informed of the existence of the MCAS system:

“There are 1,400 pages and only one mention of the infamous Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS) … in the abbreviations sections. But the manual does not include an explanation of what it is…”

Perhaps Boeing determined that information about this system wasn’t worth attention by pilots. After all, the intention of the MCAS system was to make the 737 Max 8 to give the same “feel” as the previous model the 737 NG. This is what we call in software circles as virtualization. That is, this is software that renders a virtual machine on the pilot’s user interface to the plane so it feels and acts like another kind of plane (i.e. one that is structurally balanced).

There is a “law” in software development knows as “The Law of Leaky Abstractions” which states “All non-trivial abstractions, to some degree, are leaky.” MCAS is perhaps a leaky abstraction, that is, it tries to creates a virtual abstraction of a legacy 737 NG without Leap engines, to hide an unbalanced airplane. Surely, nothing can leak with this kind of abstraction? It is one thing to abstract away virtual machinery and its entirely another thing to attempt to abstract away physical reality. However, in both cases, something will eventually leak through.

So does the MCAS behave when its abstractions begin to leak? Here is what is reported by pilots of the plane:

“On both the NG and the MAX, when you have a runaway trim stab this can be stopped temporarily by pulling the control column in the opposite direction. But when the MCAS is activated because of a high angle of attack, this can only be stopped by cutting the electrical trim motor.”

How a pilot responds to an abstraction leak can be very different from that of the real thing it is trying to abstract. With faulty sensors, one can turn this off and use one’s understanding of the situation and the plane to make good decisions. However, when one’s understanding of the nature of the plane is virtual and not real, then you just can’t revert to reality. Reality is outside of the pilot’s comprehension and thus a cause to inproper decision making. A virtual trashcan works like a regular trash can in that you can still recover the documents you place in the trash before it is emptied. Reality however is very different than the virtual world, many times there is no undo function!

Then there’s this leaky abstraction when the plane itself has exhibited its own intentions:

But the EFS never acts by itself, so we were astounded when we heard what the real reason was. (…) However, in some cases — as happened on Flight 610 — the MCAS moves by itself.

and this:

MCAS is activated without pilot input and only operates in manual, flaps up flight.

This is because, a virtual abstraction of a real plane, is the same as Level 5 automation! If MCAS is turned off, the pilots will find themselves to be flying an entirely different plane. When you abstract away interaction with reality, you cannot avoid introducing a process that mediates between a pilot’s action and the actual actions of the plane. The behavior of the real plane will depend on the environment that it is in. The behavior of a virtual plane will depend on just the working sensors that are available to render the virtual simulation. Level 5 automation requires a kind of intelligence that is aware of what sensors are faulty and furthermore is able to navigate a problem with partial and unobserved information. The smarts to enable this kind of Artificial Intelligence is simply not available in our current state of technological development.

In short, Boeing has decided to implement technology that is simply too ambitious. Not all software has the same level of complexity. This is not an issue of insufficient testing to uncover logical flaws in the software. This is not an issue of robustly handling sensor and equipment failure. This is an issue of attempting to implement an overly ambitious and thus a dangerous solution.

Air travel is extremely reliable, but introducing software patches as a means to virtualize physical behavior can lead to unintended consequences. The reason that we still fly planes with pilots in them is that we expect pilots to be able to solve unexpected situations that automation cannot handle. MCAS like virtualization, handcuffs pilots from differentiating between the real and the simulated. I would thus recommend to regulators that in the future, MCAS like virtualization should be treated and tested very differently from other automation. They should be treated as Level 5 automation with a more exhaustive level of scrutiny.

Update December 2019

Further Reading