We have in the past seen instances such as the failure of Microsoft bot Tay, when it developed a tendency to come up with racist remarks. Within 24 hours of its existence and interaction with people, it starting sending offensive comments, and went from “humans are super cool” to being almost a Nazi.

While on one hand, chatbots, robots and conversational platforms are finding their niche in many companies, these technological advancements are also turning mainstream to become the face of the company. But many times they end up failing and disappointing us. While most of the times these technologies fail because companies don’t clearly define their purpose, others could be pure technical glitches.

Here we list some of the tech failures from last year that hint that the companies need to work harder and keep coming up with better and improved versions of their innovations.

1. When Facebook’s Chatbots Developed Their Own Language

Subscribe to our Newsletter Join our editors every weekday evening as they steer you through the most significant news of the day, introduce you to fresh perspectives, and provide unexpected moments of joy Email Sign up Your newsletter subscriptions are subject to AIM Privacy Policy and Terms and Conditions.

As scary as it may sound, “Bob” and “Alice”, the chatbots created by Facebook had to be shut down as the duo started communicating in their own language, defying human generated algorithms.

The bots were originally developed to learn how to negotiate, by mimicking human trading and bartering, but when they were paired to trade against each other, they started to learn their own bizarre form of communication. Though they were designed to communicate in English, they developed their own mysterious language that humans couldn’t crack.

Bob: i can i i everything else . . . . . . . . . .

Alice: balls have zero to me to me to me to me to me to me to me to me to

This is how their conversation looked like. Researchers stopped the operation of the chatbots citing that they were looking at bots that could behave differently.

2. When Mitra The Robot Failed To Greet The Prime Minister

The indigenously built robot called Mitra, developed by Bengaluru-based Invento Robotics walked up to welcome Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Ivanka Trump at the the Global Entrepreneurship Summit (GES) opening in Hyderabad. While the robot was programmed to welcome each of them with their names on pressing the respective flags, it failed to do so.

When Modi was first requested to press Indian flag, Ivanka also ended up pressing the US flag simultaneously and because of the confusion due to overlapping, Mitra could not function properly.

This failure could be attributed to being poorly coded, where there was no specific instruction given to the robot to complete the current task before starting a new one. For instance, it kept on saying “Welcome miss Ivan, Welcome miss Ivan, Welcome Shri Narendra Modi”. The robot could not say Ivanka Trump’s full name because before it could complete the sentence, it received a new input, and gave a preference to newer requests.

3. When Autonomous And Driverless Vehicles Turned Disastrous

In a tragic incident involving Uber self driving car, a woman was killed during a trial, stalling autonomous vehicle operations worldwide. The car was travelling on a partially lit road, when a woman appeared out of nowhere in the darkness. The Uber self driving Volvo which was driving at a speed of 61 kmph, failed to apprehend the same and resulted in a fateful crash.

Back in India, Delhi’s first ever driverless metro met with an accident during its trial, and it was touted to be human error and negligence. Reportedly, the trial train was moved to testing from the workshop without testing the brake, as a result of which the moving train hit the adjacent boundary wall, with no harm to lives.

4. When iPhone X’s Face Recognition Could Not Differentiate Identical Twins

When Apple released its iPhone X with much aplomb, it was awed for its artificial intelligence and machine learning capabilities. Facial recognition was one of the key capabilities that it boasted, but it was found to have a weakness for identical twins.

When Apple unveiled the Face ID in September, it did warn that its acceptance rate might be somewhat lower if presented with two people with very similar DNA, aka identical twins, it could be speculated that Face ID wasn’t perfect. Face ID, a face mapping technology that can unlock phones, verify Apple Pay and replace fingerprint scanners, could be fooled at some level, especially when identical twins are made to use the Face ID.

That’s not all, a week after the phone’s release, Vietnamese security firm Bkav, using a mask with 3D printed base, convinced the phone that it was human and made the phone to unlock itself. The firm said that it cost merely $150 to create the mask, and hinted towards a possible hacker’s attack in the future.

5. When Alexa And Amazon Echo Goofed Up

The popular Amazon Echo cost one of its owners a huge locksmith bill, when police had to break down the house on complaints from neighbours of loud music early in the morning. Amazon Echo, which comes with robust and smart speakers accidentally activated itself and blasted music, when the residents were out.

In another instance, Amazon Alexa, a virtual assistant that has made lives of many easier, placed an order for $170 dollhouse, when a six-year-old asked for one.

On A Concluding Note

Though there have been stunning developments in the field of artificial intelligence and robotics over the years, these failures suggest that there is a lot more to achieve. The companies increasingly need to rewire their DNA and bring better features and innovations to ensure an unmistakable customer experience. While general intelligence is a far reaching goal for AI, botification has the power to bring convenience at a much faster pace, if they are 100 percent successful.. Delhi Metro's Magenta Line is to run between Janakpuri in Delhi and neighbouring Noida.

Highlights Delhi Metro blames "human error, negligence", orders high-level inquiry

Crash took place because the train's brakes were disengaged

Magenta line will slash travel between south Delhi and Noida to 19 mins

A driverless Delhi Metro train being tested on a new "Magenta Line" crashed through a wall this afternoon, just days before its launch by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Christmas. No one was hurt in the crash, which allegedly took place because the train's brakes were disengaged. The Delhi Metro has blamed it on "human error and negligence" and has ordered a high-level inquiry.Two coaches were badly damaged after the train, which was empty, went through a wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot and barely missed crashing to the ground. The incident took place around 3.40 pm."A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall," the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said in a statement.

The Delhi Metro says it appears to be a case of human error

In photos, a portion of the engine jutted out of the wall of the station.Officials said at the workshop, the brakes of a train are usually disengaged so its systems can be checked thoroughly. The brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff before the train left the shed. "It appears this was not done...the person who took charge of the train did not check the brake...Without the brakes, the train rolled back when it was being taken on a washing ramp," the statement said.PM Modi is scheduled to inaugurate the Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden stretch of the Magenta line, which is to run between Delhi and Noida. The Magenta line promises to slash travel between south Delhi and Noida to just 19 minutes.The 12.64-km section was granted safety approval just last month.Delhi Metro's Managing Director Mangu Singh said operations on the Magenta Line were "absolutely safe", with a high level of automation."Today's incident was manual error during maintenance and has nothing to do with the trials or passenger safety during future operations," said Mr Singh.The new Metro line will have automated platform screen doors at every station, just like jubilee line of the London tube, say officials.. About a month after being granted safety approval by the commissioner for Metro Rail Safety (CMRS), an unmanned Delhi Metro train on the yet-to-be-inaugurated Magenta Line derailed, crashing into a wall.

The incident happened during a trial run on the line which, once completed, will connect Botanical Garden with Janakpuri West, covering a distance of 38.23km.

Delhi Metro Train crashed into the wall. It happened at Kalindi Kunj depo. PM Narendra Modi will inaugurate the Botanical Garden on the Kalkaji Mandir stretch (Magenta Line) on December 25. pic.twitter.com/vyozISos01 — Shadab Moizee (@shadabmoizee) December 19, 2017

Advertisement

The first section of the Magenta Line, connecting Botanical Garden with Kalkaji, will be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on December 25.

This accident comes at a time when excitement around the new generation driverless trains is rising. However, the latest incident may serve as a setback for now. The thought of riding on driverless trains in a country where public safety is often the last on the list of priorities for authorities was, in any case, enough to scare the daylights out of most commuters.

This accident, the reasons for which remain a matter of investigation, may further delay the introduction of the unmanned trains.

Driverless trains have been a part of public transport in many developed countries for some time now. In India, the idea took flight in the summer of 2015 when the first driverless six-coach train arrived in New Delhi from South Korea.

By the end of 2015, 20 such six-coach train sets were manufactured by Hyundai Rotem, a South Korea-based company.

DMRC's new generation driverless trains, to begin with, will run between Botanical Garden and Kalkaji, where an advanced Communication Based Train Control signalling technology, facilitating movement of trains with a frequency of 90-100 seconds, will be pressed into service.

Advertisement

According to the existing plan, initially, drivers are going to be deputed in these trains to ensure smooth operation. However, gradually, they will be withdrawn, moving to unattended train operations. While the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has confirmed the incident, it has clarified there is no need to panic. But it will be difficult for passengers not to panic when they actually hop on the train knowing it is unmanned, especially in the backdrop of today's (December 19) accident.

The Metro staff is currently exploring technical reasons to ascertain the reason for the derailment. About 30 lakh people use the Metro in the national capital region every day to travel to work, meet friends or just get home. That's too big a number to take lightly.. A Metro train on a new line, to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi next week, hit a wall here on Tuesday evening during trials as its brakes failed, a Delhi Metro official said. No one was injured.

The incident, on the upcoming section between Noida and Kalkalji, occurred at 3.40 p.m. at the Kalindi Kunj Metro Depot due to brake failure, the Delhi Metro said.

"A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall," said the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) statement.

In a video grab of the incident which has since gone viral, the train can be seen coming out from the other side of the wall of the depot after hitting it.

Attributing the incident to "human error", the DMRC said it appeared to have occurred because the brakes were not checked properly after the train was taken off the signalling system by the person who was in charge of the train.

It said once the train enters the workshop, it is taken off the signal system and brakes are properly checked before it is put back in operation.

"Prima facie, it appears, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident," it said.

The DMRC added that though the trains on the upcoming Magenta Line are enabled to be driven without drivers, at the time of the incident inside the workshop, it was being manually operated since it was off the signal system.



"DMRC has ordered a high level enquiry into this incident by a committee of three officers... Prima facie it appears to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the enquiry," it added.

Modi is to inaugurate a section (Botanical Garden - Kalkaji Mandir) on the line on December 25.



Delhi Govt seeks report from DMRC on train crash during trial



The Delhi government has sought a report from the DMRC after a train crashed during a trial run on the magenta line that was scheduled to be inaugurated by the prime minister next week.



There can be no compromise on passenger safety, Delhi Transport minister Kailash Gahlot said while seeking report from the the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC).



"I have sought a report from DMRC on the derailment of its driverless train during trial run on Kalkaji-botanical Garden. Shocking lapse ! There can be no compromise on passenger safety," Gahlot tweeted.

. New Delhi: A driverless Delhi Metro train on the Magenta line on Monday crashed into a wall during a trial run at Kalindi Kunj depot in the city.

The accident occurred at 3.40 PM (1540hrs) at the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot, said DMRC. There were, however, no casualties.

The DMRC asserted it will have no bearing on December 25 launch, which is to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

"A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident," read a statement from DMRC.

The Managing Director of DMRC, Mangu Singh, has ordered a high level enquiry into this incident by a committee of three officers of the rank of Executive Directors.

"Prima facie, it appears to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the enquiry," read the statement from DMRC.

Mangu Singh, said that "main line operations on this line are absolutely safe, with a high level of automation and has been thoroughly checked and cleared by the commissioner of metro rail safety for passenger operations "

"Today's incident was a manual error during maintenance and has nothing to do with the trials or passenger safety during future operations," he said.

The Delhi government, meanwhile, also sought a report from the DMRC on the incident with Transport Minister Kailash Gahlot tweeting: "Shocking lapse! There can be no compromise on passenger safety."

The DMRC and the Delhi government are engaged in a running feud over the recent rise in commuting fares. The Arvind Kejriwal government continues to insist that the fare hike should be rolled back.

The first leg of the project that is being inaugurated this Christmas was scheduled to be operational by December 2015. Trial runs between the Kalindi Kunj and Kalkaji Mandir section of the Magenta Line started in August 2016.

Phase 4 of the Delhi Metro is also caught in delays. The cost required is likely to increase by Rs 6,000 crore as the Centre and the Delhi government are yet to decide whether Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) will be the funding agency or not. Additionally, DMRC will have to prepare detailed project reports afresh for the new phase by involving private players, mandated under the new Metro policy.

A spokesperson of DMRC said that 2500-3000 people travel on a single Metro. The 12.64-km section, part of metro's upcoming Botanical Garden-Janakpuri West (Magenta) Line, was granted safety approval by the Commissioner for Metro Rail Safety (CMRS) last month.

Metro's new generation trains, which can run without drivers, will operate on this section where an advanced Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) signalling technology that will facilitate movement of trains with a frequency of 90 to 100 seconds will also be pressed into service.

However, for an initial period of two-three years the trains will have drivers.

Currently, those travelling to south Delhi have to change have to change trains at Mandi House Metro Station.

After the new section is opened, commuters will be able to travel directly to Kalkaji Mandir Metro Station, which is on the Violet Line, cutting travel time by about 45 minutes.

Once the entire corridor from Botanical Garden till Janakpuri West (38.23 km) is operational, commuters from Noida will be able to go to Gurgaon by changing trains at Hauz Khas.

The Botanical Garden station has been developed as Delhi Metro's first-ever inter-change station outside the boundaries of Delhi.

The route has nine stations: Kalkaji Mandir, Okhla NSIC, Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Kalindi Kunj, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden.. “This part of the depot is for maintenance of trains and without power for trains. Trains are pulled by a shunter engine and therefore this area is not controlled by signaling system. Accordingly, the train was doing local shunting in this part with a person on board and was not ‘driverless’. Such an operation would not affect the main line operations in any way whatsoever where public would be carried eventually,” Dayal said.. A driverless metro train on a trial run in New Delhi crashed through the wall of the Kalindi Kunj depot in South Delhi on Tuesday, ANI reported.

The mishap comes just days before Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to inaugurate the Delhi Metro’s Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden line on Christmas Day. Unmanned trains will ply on the route in about two to three years, NDTV reported.

Delhi Metro Train crashed into the wall. It happened at Kalindi Kunj depo. PM Narendra Modi will inaugurate the Botanical Garden on the Kalkaji Mandir stretch (Magenta Line) on December 25. pic.twitter.com/vyozISos01 — Shadab Moizee (@shadabmoizee) December 19, 2017

The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said the accident occurred because the maintenance team did not check the train’s brakes before the trial run. The metro authority has ordered a high-level inquiry into the incident, saying a committee of three of its officers will look into it.

The corporation said the train was being operated manually when it was taken to the Kalindi Kunj depot to be washed. When the operator moved the train up a ramp, it slid backwards because the brakes were not working.

Kalkaji Mandir is a station on the Violet Line in South Delhi, and Botanical Garden is located on the metro’s Blue Line in Noida. The new line, known as the Magenta Line, will reduce the travel time between South Delhi and Noida.

The first phase of the 12.64-km-long Magenta Line will have nine stations – Botanical Garden, Okhla Bird Sanctuary, Kalindi Kunj, Jasola Vihar Shaheen Bagh, Ohla Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Sukhdev Vihar, Okhla NSIC and Kalkaji Mandir.. Follow us on Driverless Delhi metro breaks through the wall, Twitterati erupt with hilarious memes!

On Tuesday afternoon, Delhi Metro’s driverless train rammed into a boundary wall after the authorities failed to check the brake systems. The incident took place at 3:40 pm at the Kalindi Kunj depot. Nobody was injured in the crash, but the pictures from the accident went viral on the internet. Soon after the accident, Twitter was bombarded with hilarious memes made out of the viral picture. Check them out.

PM Modi is scheduled to inaugurate the Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden stretch of the Magenta Line, which will run between Delhi and Noida. The authorities have blamed the accident on human negligence and a high-level inquiry is ordered on the matter.

"A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall," the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said in a statement.

Ideally, the brake system of the train should’ve been tested before sending it for the trial. "It appears this was not done...the person who took charge of the train did not check the brake...Without the brakes, the train rolled back when it was being taken on a washing ramp," the statement said.

Delhi Metro's Managing Director Mangu Singh said operations on the Magenta Line were "absolutely safe", with a high level of automation. "Today's incident was manual error during maintenance and has nothing to do with the trials or passenger safety during future operations," said Mr Singh.. A driverless train on the New Delhi Metro has crashed during test run, with a carriage plowing through a depot wall. An inquiry has been launched, with metro officials citing "human error" as the main cause of the incident.

The new automatically-operated train was being tested on Delhi's Magenta Line on Tuesday. At some point its brakes became disengaged, and the train rolled and crashed into a station wall, local media reports. As a result, it plowed through the wall, "barely missing crashing to the ground," according to NDTV.

Delhi Metro's magenta line, to be inaugurated by @narendramodi crashes through wall on test run. @htTweetspic.twitter.com/1eHemQjOhG — PANKAJ PARASHAR (@PANKAJPARASHAR_) December 19, 2017

There were no people on board, and no one was reported injured in the incident. However, two carriages of the train were badly damaged.

READ MORE: Driverless SUV smashes through shop entrance, knocks down child (VIDEO)

Metro officials have ordered an inquiry into the incident, and blamed it on "human error and negligence." In a statement, they said maintenance staff in charge of the train had failed to test the brake system. "While the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall," the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said.

A 'driverless' Delhi Metro train of soon to be opened Magenta Line crashes through wall of Kalindi Kunj depot during a trial run @TOIDelhipic.twitter.com/kKSlcntJpi — Sidhartha Roy (@SidharthaRoyTOI) December 19, 2017

A 'driverless' Delhi Metro train of soon to be opened Magenta Line crashes through wall of Kalindi Kunj depot during a trial run @TOIDelhipic.twitter.com/M6gcNRSj2i — Sidhartha Roy (@SidharthaRoyTOI) December 19, 2017

The part of the line with the new self-driving train is scheduled to launch in less than a week, with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi set to open it. Despite the incident, the launch will go ahead as planned, metro officials said.. Driverless Delhi metro train rams into wall | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: In a shocking incident, a driverless train of the Delhi Metro took off and rammed into a wall during the trial run of the new Botanical Garden-Kalkaji Magenta line. Prime Minister Narendra Modi was expected to inaugurate the new metro line on December 25 - but the event itself is under question.

The Delhi government has sought a report from the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, said Transport Minister Kailash Gahlot.

The driverless train, which took off from the new Botanical Garden, broke through boundary at Kalindi Kunj depot. Initial investigation suggests the train did not stop after the automated brakes on the train failed.

A special feature is that the new line will also have 'driverless trains'. Initially, drivers will run the trains and only after stringent trials, the ‘unattended train operations’ will commence. However, the first trial run has ended in a mishap.

Also read in Hindi: SHOCKING VIDEO- दिल्ली में दीवार तोड़ बाहर ट्रायल के दौरान बाहर निकली मेट्रो ट्रेन

After the accident, the Delhi Metro Rail Cooperation has issued a statement explaining why the incident took place and stating that a high-level enquiry has been ordered into the incident. The statement adds that this appears to be a "case of human error and negligence" and that appropriate action will be taken after the enquiry.

"A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident," the statement said.

"As per normal procedure prescribed, when a train enters the workshop, the brakes of the train are decommissioned so that the train and its systems including the brakes can be freely checked. As per procedure, once the train is again re-commissioned, the brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train left the shed. The train movement inside the workshop area is done manually and not by the signalling system. Prima facie, it appears, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident," the statement added.

The line had, in fact, gone through a safety inspection -- considered the last step before the start of the operation -- during November 13 to 15, and was expected to commence operations later that month.

Delhi Metro‬ ‪Magenta Line‬ starts from December 25: Know about Kalkaji-Botanical Garden route map, features

However, according to informed sources, the inauguration was put on hold due to various bureaucratic reasons, one of them being the selection of a personality to perform the opening.

The new line is expected to reduce the travel time taken from Noida to South Delhi almost two hours. It is expected the travel time of commuters between Botanical Garden and Kalkaji from the existing 52 minutes (Botanical Garden to Mandi House via Blue Line and onwards to Kalkaji on Violet Line) to a direct 19 minutes.

Trains to have better frequency on Delhi Metro's Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden Magenta Line – Here's why

But this mishap comes as an embarrassment and a cause of worry for the authorities.. Home

Viral

Delhi Metro Accident: Driverless Magenta Line train Crashes Into Wall, Twitter Erupts With Funny Memes and Jokes

Delhi Metro Accident: Driverless Magenta Line train Crashes Into Wall, Twitter Erupts With Funny Memes and Jokes

The pictures and videos of the metro went viral on Twitter and they turned it into memes.

Yesterday, a driverless metro train being tested on soon to be open Magenta line crashed through a wall at the Kalindi Kunj station. The crash which took place around 3.40 pm reportedly happened because the train’s brakes were disengaged. No one was injured in the crash. The Delhi Metro blamed the crash on “human error and negligence” and a high-level inquiry will be conducted soon. Mangu Singh, Delhi Metro’s Managing Director, told that operations on the metro of the magenta line were “absolutely safe”, with a high level of mechanization.

Trending Now

“Today’s incident was a manual error during maintenance and has nothing to do with the trials or passenger safety during future operations,” said Mr Singh. And soon Twitter was abuzz with several memes on the same. Yes, the pictures and videos of the train went viral on the micro-blogging site and they turned it into memes. Check out some funny tweets:

You may like to read

Hahaha!

muze delhi pasand nahi he ! me to chali delhi se bahar pic.twitter.com/SLzH8FIWNf — Om (@ohokohokok) December 19, 2017

LOL

Wall construction went wrong

#DelhiMetro should have used Ambuja Cement for constructing the wall, deewaar ka tootna naamumkin hota — Italian Bahu (@ItalianBahu) December 19, 2017

Breaking boundaries literally

Bollywood song for the crash

Tere liye hi toh signal tod taad ke

Aaya Dilli wali girlfriend chhod chhad ke😂😂https://t.co/I1hHt5YuLL — Abdul Mustafa (@abdulmustafa01) December 19, 2017

Spiderman saved it?

Test Game?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will soon inaugurate the Kalkaji mandir-Botanical garden stretch of the Magenta line. The metro will run between Delhi and Noida. “A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall,” the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation said in a statement.

The brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff before the train left the shed. “It appears this was not done…the person who took charge of the train did not check the brake…Without the brakes, the train rolled back when it was being taken on a washing ramp,” the statement said. What are your views? Let us know in the comments below.

For breaking news and live news updates, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and Instagram. Read more on Latest Viral News on India.com.. . NEW DELHI: A day after a Delhi metro train crashed into a wall six days before its commissioning with the scheduled launch of the magenta line by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) suspended four employees, ANI reported.The Delhi metro train had on Tuesday crashed into the wall at Kalindi Kunj depot when it rolled back on a ramp while being taken for washing.There were no casualties, according to the DMRC which blamed the incident on "human error and negligence" during maintenance and asserted it would have no bearing on the December 25 launch.A DMRC official said that the empty train, part of metro's new generation 'driverless' fleet, broke through a portion of the boundary wall at the depot around 3.40pm as it rolled back."A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall," the DMRC said in a statement.The end of the train which hit the wall suffered damage and a portion of the wall collapsed, suggesting that the collision was quite intense.A high-level inquiry by a committee of three officers of the rank of executive directors has been ordered, the DMRC said earlier."Prima facie, it appears to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the inquiry," PTI quoted the DMRC statement as saying.The Managing Director of DMRC, Mangu Singh, said that "main line operations on this line are absolutely safe, with a high level of automation and has been thoroughly checked and cleared by the commissioner of metro rail safety for passenger operations "Today's incident was a manual error during maintenance and has nothing to do with the trials or passenger safety during future operations," he said.The Delhi government, meanwhile, also sought a report from the DMRC on the incident with transport minister Kailash Gahlot tweeting: "Shocking lapse! There can be no compromise on passenger safety."The DMRC and the Delhi government are engaged in a running feud over the recent rise in commuting fares. The Arvind Kejriwal government continues to insist that the fare hike should be rolled back.The train was to be pressed into service on the 12.38-km-long Botanical Garden-Kalkaji Mandir section, which is part of the magenta line coming up as part of metro's Phase III construction.Only on Tuesday, the DMRC had announced that the section will be inaugurated by PM Modi on December 25.The inauguration was very much on track, a metro official said, stressing the accident will "not have any bearing" on the services on the new corridor.As per DMRC's laid down norms, when a train enters a workshop (depot), the brakes of the train are decommissioned so that the train and its systems including the brakes can be freely checked.Once the train is again re-commissioned, the brakes are tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train leaves the shed. The train movement inside the workshop area is done manually and not by the signalling system."Prima facie, it appears, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident," the DMRC said.Otherwise, when a train is on service, its brakes are largely guided by the automatic signalling system and controlled from the Operations Control Centre (OCC), one of which is housed inside the metro headquarters itself.Earlier, in November 2016, two trains, on trial, had grazed each other at the same depot.(With inputs from PTI). Advertisement

New Delhi: In connection with incident of Delhi Metro’s driverless train in Kalindikunj depot on December 19, DMRC Chief Dr. Mangu Singh approved orders for suspension of four officials connected held primarily responsible for the unexpected incident causing damage to metro property including a train, a shunter and workshop building infrastructure.

The four officials included one Deputy General Manager who was the In-charge of Kalindi Kunj depot, one Assistant Manager under him responsible for the depot activities and a Junior Engineer and Assistant Section Engineer who were involved in operating that train. The suspension is based on the enquiry done by a team of three Executive Director rank officers.

buy vilitra generic cialisnextdaydeliveryusa.com/vilitra.html over the counter



The incident report of the enquiry revealed that this incident was solely attributable to human failure as proper procedures were not followed. The train’s brakes, which were isolated (necessary for push/pull operations in the depot area when a train is required to move with a battery operated vehicle) were not normalized before moving the train on its own power and bringing it for washing at the ramp. As a result, as soon as the operator brought the train at the ramp, it started rolling back, got derailed and hit the wall.



“The incident was a localized incident within the maintenance shed of the depot. This part of the depot is for maintenance of trains and without power for trains. Trains are pulled by a shunter engine and therefore this area is not controlled by signaling system. Accordingly, the train was doing local shunting in this part with a person on board and was not ‘driverless’. Such an operation would would not affect the main line operations in any way whatsoever where public would be carried eventually.”, said in a press release issued by the DMRC.

“The incident was a cause of human error and concerned officers and staff have already been suspended.”, said Anuj Dayalm CPRO of DMRC.

DMRC has also decided to go ahead with the inauguration of the Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden stretch on December 25 by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.. Accident on Delhi Metro new line during trials

New Delhi 19-December-2017

A Metro train on a new line, to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi next week, hit a wall here on Tuesday evening during trials, a Delhi Metro official said. No one was injured.

The driverless Metro hit a wall inside the depot in Kalkaji Metro station around 4 p.m., a Delhi Metro Rail Corporation official told IANS, adding that no one was injured.

The Delhi Metro's Magenta line, which is scheduled to be inaugurated on December 25 by the Prime Minister, connects Botanical Garden in Noida and Kalkaji in south Delhi.

The official said that they were investigating the cause of the accident. - IANS. New Delhi: A train on Delhi's Metro's soon-to-be-launched Magenta Line rolled into the maintenance depot and crashed through its wall on the west bank of the Yamuna on Tuesday after the staff apparently forgot to apply the brakes.

According to a statement by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), the train, whose brakes were disengaged, rolled down a ramp at Kalindi Kunj around 3.40pm into the washing plant and crashed into a wall before coming to rest in front of a ditch.

The trains are driverless but will have drivers for the first two-three years.

The statement said: "When a train enters the workshop, the brakes are decommissioned so that the train and its systems, including the brakes, can be freely checked. As per procedure, once the train is again re-commissioned, the brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train left the shed. The train movement inside the workshop area is done manually."

The statement added: "Prima facie, it appears, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back."

DMRC sources said the launch of the Magenta Line, which will connect west Delhi with Noida, by Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be done as scheduled on December 25.. Source: Xinhua| 2017-12-19 23:07:08|Editor: yan

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, Dec. 19 (Xinhua) -- A driverless Metro train crashed into a wall Tuesday during a trial run in Indian capital city, officials said.

No one was hurt in the accident, however two coaches of the train were damaged.

According to officials, the empty train went through a wall but barely missed crashing into the ground.

The accident took place at Kalindi Kunj depot in the city on Magenta line.

"A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident," said Anuj Dayal, a senior official of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC).

Dayal said an investigation has been ordered into the accident.

"Prima facie it appears to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the inquiry," he said.

The Delhi Metro's Magenta Line is scheduled to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Dec. 25.

Reports said the DMRC officials say the inauguration will go ahead as scheduled.

The Magenta Line is to run between Janakpuri in Delhi and neighbouring Noida.. New Delhi, Dec 20 (IANS) The Delhi Metro on Wednesday sacked four of its officials, including a Deputy General Manager, for Tuesday's accident in which a metro train rammed through a wall after failure of its brakes.A three-member committee was formed after the accident on the Magenta Line to look into the causes."The four officials included one Deputy General Manager who was the Depot Incharge, one Assistant Manager under him responsible for this depot activity and a Junior Engineer and Assistant Section Engineer who were involved in operating this train."The suspension is based on the enquiry done by a team of three Executive Director rank officials," the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) said in a statement.The accident which happened inside the Kalindi Kunj metro depot located on the upcoming Magenta Line (Botanical Garden - Janakpuri West) was a result of "human error", the transporter said, arising out of "not following proper procedure"."The train's brakes, which were isolated (necessary for push/pull operations in the depot area when a train is required to move with a battery operated vehicle) were not normalized before moving the train on its own power and bringing it for washing at the ramp."As a result, as soon as the operator brought the train at the ramp, it started rolling back, got derailed and hit the wall," the DMRC said.A segment of the line (Botanical Garden-Kalkaji Mandir) which is ready for operation, is scheduled to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on December 25.Though the new line will see trains which are enabled to be driven without drivers, it will have trains run by drivers initially with "high level of automation". The driverless train function will be brought thereafter.--IANSvn/rn. A driver-less Delhi metro train, on a trial run, breaks through a wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot since brakes couldn't be applied in time. The incident comes less than a week before PM Narendra Modi inaugurates the new Magenta metro line from Botanical Garden in Noida to Kalkaji. pic.twitter.com/23iGzdO5Eq — ABP News (@abpnewstv) December 19, 2017

The incident occurred at 3:40 pm and the impact of the crash had left the eyewitnesses in shock.The train was supposed to go forward but it ran backwards breaking through the boundary wall of Kalindi Kunj depot. The front portion of the metro train and a stretch of the depot's boundary wall was damaged. The mishap comes less than a week before PM Narendra Modi inaugurates the new Magenta metro line from Botanical Garden in Noida to Kalkaji Mandir in Delhi on December 25."A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident," the Delhi Metro said in a statement. "MD, DMRC has ordered a high level enquiry into this incident by a committee of three officers of the rank of Executive Directors. "Prima facie it appears, to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the inquiry," it said. The DMRC said the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. "While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident," it added.The Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden line of the Delhi Metro will reduce travel time between Noida and south Delhi. The 12.64-km section, part of metro's upcoming Botanical Garden-Janakpuri West (Magenta) Line, was granted safety approval by the Commissioner for Metro Rail Safety (CMRS) last month.Metro's new generation trains, which can run without drivers, will run on this section where an advanced Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) signalling technology that will facilitate movement of trains with a frequency of 90 to 100 seconds will also be pressed into service. However, for an initial period of two-three years the trains will have drivers. Currently, for travelling to south Delhi areas, commuters from Noida have to change trains, from Blue Line to Violet Line, at Mandi House Metro Station. After the new section of the Delhi Metro is opened, commuters will be able to travel directly to Kalkaji Mandir Metro Station, which is on the Violet Line, cutting travel time by about 45 minutes. Once the entire corridor from Botanical Garden till Janakpuri West (38.23 km) is opened, commuters from Noida will be able to go to Gurgaon by changing trains at Hauz Khas. The Botanical Garden has been developed as the metro's first-ever inter-change station outside the boundaries of Delhi.. Delhi metro's driverless train being tested on to be inaugurated Magenta Line crashed through a wall on Monday afternoon.

The metro crash happened at the Kalindi Kunj depot.

Although nobody was reported injured in the crash which allegedly took place because the train's brakes were disengaged.

However, startling pictures of the train quickly went viral on Twitter where people soon began to turn them into memes.

Joining the league, Indian captain Rohit Sharma also took a dig at the DMRC through his social media account.

The Indian opener tweeted another picture of the crash along with a cheeky joke.

However, the Delhi Metro came out with an explanation saying the accident was not in any way a result of the trains being driverless.. A driverless Delhi Metro train on Tuesday rammed into a wall during its trial run after brakes were not applied in time. The train running on the Magenta line, which is expected to be inaugurated by PM Narendra Modi on December 25, broke through the boundary at Kalindi Kunj depot. There were no passengers onboard when the accident happened.. The Delhi Metro’s yet-to-be-inaugurated Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden Magenta Line stretch witnessed a minor mishap when the train crashed into the wall reportedly due to brake failure on Tuesday.

As per reports, the Metro train crashed into the wall of the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot. So far, there is no news of anybody getting hurt. The DMRC officials haven’t issued any statement yet.

The Delhi Metro’s Kalkaji Mandir-Botanical Garden line will be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 25 December.

Advertisement

The driverless Metro hit a wall inside the depot in Kalkaji Metro station around 4 p.m., a Delhi Metro Rail Corporation official told IANS, adding that no one was injured.

The Delhi Metro’s Magenta line, which is scheduled to be inaugurated on December 25 by the Prime Minister, connects Botanical Garden in Noida and Kalkaji in south Delhi.

The official said that they were investigating the cause of the accident.

(with Input from agencies). Delhi Metro officials suspended four people after the accident in Kalindi Kunj Metro Rail Depot. Yesterday, Delhi’s first driverless Metro train went through the Kalindi Kunj metro depot’s wall and then its boundary wall. However, the crash has nothing to do with the signalling technology. Delhi is using the first communication-based train control (CBTC) which is being operated manually for the maintenance. As per the reports, the DMRC managing director, Mangu Singh approved the orders of suspension of four officials. DMRC chief spokesperson Anuj Dayal said that the order of suspension based on an inquiry by a team of three executive director-rank officials.

Kalindi-Kunj Metro depot is the Magenta line who’s trial has been started two days back. On 25th December, PM Modi to extend the inauguration of Magenta line. A day after a trial empty Delhi Metro train crashed into a wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot. The reports of the incident revealed that it was a human failure as proper procedures and guidelines were not followed said the DMRC officials.

Magenta line metro train is the first driverless train and trial was going on for two days. DMRC issued a press release which is stating that inauguration by PM Modi on 25th December will not be affected by this accident. Also, stating the reason for the accident, DMRC said that the Metro train went to a workshop for washing and when it comes on the ramp for washing, its crashed at Kalindi Kunj metro depot. DMRC officials have suspended four employees for this accident.

However, no one got injured in the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot accident because Magenta line is the first driverless metro which is running on trial while accident took place, so no one was there inside the Metro. Delhi’s first communication-based train control of the DMRC crashed due to some negligence of the Metro officials. So, the Senior officials have suspended four staff member who was involved in this accident.. (With inputs from agencies)

NEW DELHI: A driverless Delhi Metro train, running on the Magenta line, on Tuesday rammed into a wall at Kalindi Kunj depot when it rolled back on a ramp when being taken for washing."The person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident," ANI quoted DMRC as saying.According to the norms, when a train enters a workshop or depot, its brakes are decommissioned, to ensure thorough and detailed check, reported PTI.Once the train is re-commissioned, the brakes are tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train leaves the shed. The train movement inside the workshop area is done manually and not by the signalling system.There were no passengers on board when the accident occurred.DMRC termed the incident "prima facie a case of human error and negligence," and ordered a high-level inquiry by a three-member committee.It promised "appropriate action" after the inquiry. The Delhi government has also sought a report from the DMRC.The 12.64 kilometre-long Magenta line, expected to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on December 25, runs from Delhi's Kalkaji Mandir station to Noida's Botanical Garden.Trains on the Magenta line will be the first to be driverless in the history of the Delhi Metro. However, drivers will be present on the trains for some time.The new line will make it easier and faster for Noida residents to travel to south Delhi. The train will travel through nine stations - Kalkaji Mandir, Okhla NSIC, Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Kalindi Kunj, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden.. An empty metro train on a trial run broke through a boundary wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot in south-east Delhi on Tuesday afternoon. The train was to be part of the Botanical Garden-Kalkaji Mandir section (magenta line), which is scheduled to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on December 25. An empty Delhi Metro train broke through a boundary wall at the Kalindi Kunj station in New Delhi on December 19, 2017.(HT Photo)

“The train was on a trial run, running very slow. There were no casualties,” said a Delhi Metro Rail Corporation official.

Hindustan Times - your fastest source for breaking news! Read now.

According to a DMRC spokesperson, the accident took place at 3.40pm.

“A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system, as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, (it) rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident,” the spokesperson said, adding that a high-level inquiry has been ordered.

“Prima facie, it appears to be a human error and negligence. Appropriate action will be taken after an inquiry,” the spokesperson added.

DMRC chief spokesperson Anuj Dayal, however, said there was no need to panic because the line has full clearance from the commissioner of metro rail safety. Officials said the inauguration will go on as scheduled.

Magenta line mishap: No need to panic, says DMRC, Christmas inauguration on track

The magenta line metro train is scheduled to be inaugurated next week. (HT Photo)

Dr Mangu Singh, the DMRC’s managing director also said the metro track was safe.

“Main line operations on this line are absolutely safe, with a high level of automation, and has been thoroughly checked and cleared by the commissioner of metro rail safety for passenger operations,” he said.

Taking to Twitter, transport minister Kailash Gahlot expressed his shock at the mishap. “I have sought a report from DMRC on the derailment of its driverless train during trial run on Kalkaji-Botanical Garden. Shocking lapse! There can be no compromise on passenger safety,” he tweeted.

The 12.64-km stretch is part of the 38.23-km Botanical Garden-Janakpuri West corridor under the Metro’s Phase III expansion plans. The section has nine stations – Botanical Garden, Okhla Bird Sanctuary, Kalindi Kunj, Jasola Vihar-Shaheen Bagh, Okhla Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Sukhdev Vihar, Okhla NSIC and Kalkaji Mandir.

This will also be the first Metro line with driverless trains, a first in the country. But Metro clarified that at the time of the accident, the train was being operated by a driver. “Although the trains are driverless, they will run with drivers for the first 2-3 years till the system stablises,” said an official.

DMRC said that as per the standard operating procedure, when a train enters the workshop, the brakes are decommissioned. This is done so that the train and its systems, including the brakes, can be checked. “As per the procedure, once the train is again recommissioned, the brakes should be tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train leaves the shed,” the corporation said in a statement released after the accident.

The train movement inside the workshop area is handled manually and not guided by the signalling system. “Prima facie, it appeared, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brakes and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident,” the spokesperson added.

This Botanical Garden-Kalkaji section is meant to reduce the travel time between the two areas from the existing 52 minutes (Botanical Garden to Mandi House via Blue Line and onwards to Kalkaji on Violet Line) to a direct 19 minutes.

The coaches on magenta line will be brightly lit with videos guiding the passengers about routes, and have Wi-Fi, USB ports along with charging points, LED and LCD screens and backrest near the wheelchair area. The seats in the new trains will be red, pink, orange and blue, giving it a lively feel.. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation on Wednesday said that the staff — who were in control of an empty Magenta Line train, that broke through a boundary wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot during a trial run on Tuesday afternoon — became overconfident and ticked a checklist without checking the train systems manually. The Magenta Line train broke through a boundary wall at the Kalindi Kunj depot during a trial run on Tuesday afternoon(Ht photo)

Delhi Metro has suspended four officials for the mishap, which included one deputy general manager who was the depot in-charge, one assistant manager under him responsible for depot activity, a junior engineer and an assistant section engineer who were involved in operating the train. The suspension is based on the probe by a team of three executive director rank officials.

Hindustan Times - your fastest source for breaking news! Read now.

The incident occurred at 3.40pm on Tuesday at the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot. The 12.64-km stretch is part of the 38.23-km Botanical Garden-Janakpuri West corridor under the Metro’s Phase III of the expansion plans.

The section that has nine stations: Botanical Garden, Okhla Bird Sanctuary, Kalindi Kunj, Jasola Vihar-Shaheen Bagh, Okhla Vihar, Jamia Millia Islamia, Sukhdev Vihar, Okhla NSIC and Kalkaji Mandir.

When asked whether this incident will dent the image of Delhi Metro, DMRC chief Mangu Singh told Hindustan Times, “All these things are temporary. This incident will be overshadowed by our good work.”

According to initial investigations, the train was to be taken to the washing area and the in-charge at that time took it without resetting the brakes. The incident took place when the train was being shifted from maintenance area to the washing area. The maintenance area does not have power and the train is pushed or pulled by a separate vehicle and for this the brakes have to be disabled.

“We have a system as per which the person in charge of a train in the maintenance depot hands over the train to another personnel to take it to the power area (washing area). Before handing over, he goes through a checklist and brake reset is a part of it. He also records it in the register,” Singh explained.

Singh said that in this case, the Metro personnel simply ticked the brakes reset box without actually checking it. “The next person who takes over is supposed to cross check each and every item. Then only he takes the train. This is a mistake on part of both of them. It appears like it was overconfidence because of which one fellow simply ticked the checklist and the other believed (him) and took the train away for washing,” Singh said.

The washing plant of the train is set on a gradient ramp. The person in-charge of the train tried to stop it on the ramp, but couldn’t do so as there was no brake. As a result, the train reversed down the slope and crashed into the wall.

The train was to be part of the Botanical Garden-Kalkaji Mandir section, which is to be inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on December 25. Singh said that operation will not be affected since only one coach was damaged.

“If you send your car to a garage and something happens, will you call it a fault on the part of the car and say that the car is of no use now? This is not the same train which will run on main line,” Singh added.

Singh also said that wherever there is a manual system, they have to trust the person.

“Now after action is taken, people will be more careful and see that checks are done properly,” he added.. In an unexpected turn of events, a driverless train of Delhi Metro's Magenta line crashed into a wall of Kalindi Kunj metro station. The Kalkaji-Botanical Garden metro line is set to be inaugurated by PM Modi on December 25. According to a report in India Today, the incident happened within the gated boundary of the station. An inquiry has been ordered into the incident.

A Delhi Metro official confirmed the incident. The incident took place between 3 pm and 4 pm today. There were no casualties, the official mentioned. The Delhi Metro staff is looking into what led to this incident.

According to reports, Delhi Metro's new generation trains that can be manoeuvred without drivers are going to run on this route. Movement of these driverless trains would be facilitated by advanced Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) signalling technology. However, for the initial couple of years, the trains will be operated by drivers.

The same 12.64 km Magenta line was given the necessary safety approvals by Commissioner for Metro Rail Safety (CMRS) last month. However, this is also not the first time an accident has occurred on the Magenta Line. A year ago two trains equipped with anti-collision technology collided on to each other on the line 8 of the Kalindi Kunj depot, the India Today report mentions.

Once the entire Magenta Line is open, passengers from Noida will be able to reach Gurgaon by changing trains at Hauz Khas. The nine stations in this line are Kalkaji Mandir, Okhla NSIC, Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Kalindi Kunj, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden.. A driverless train going out of control and ending up where it absolutely should not be is the stuff of futuristic, 'robots-will-take-over' nightmares. And, that nightmare seemingly came alive yesterday in the National Capital Region (NCR) when a train of the new Magenta Line of the Delhi went off the rails and crashed into a boundary wall at the Kalindi Kunj carshed.

advertisement

The kicker? The Magenta Line, which will connect Noida in Uttar Pradesh to south Delhi, will run driverless trains. Coming less than a week before the new route's inauguration on December 25 (by Prime Minister Narendra Modi), the accident was bound to create panic and scare even the most daring of commuters.

However, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) was at pains to explain that the accident was NOT in any way a result of the trains being driverless. "Train movement inside the workshop area is done manually and is not operated through the [automated] signalling system. Therefore, such an incident taking place during passenger operations is NOT POSSIBLE," a Delhi Metro spokesperson said (emphasis original).

The managing director of the DMRC, Dr Mangu Singh reiterated the point and said the "main line operations on this [Magenta] line are absolutely safe, with a high level of automation and has (sic) been thoroughly checked and cleared by the commissioner of metro rail safety for passenger operations."

So what caused the accident in the first place? Well, human error, says Delhi Metro based on preliminary findings.

The accident at the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot took place essentially because some staff forgot to check whether the train's braking system was active or not after it had undergone tests and checks inside the Kalindi Kunj workshop.

According to an incident report prepared by the Delhi Metro, the train's bakes were "decommissioned", as is routine, when it was brought into a shed for tests and checks. The braking system is decommissioned "as per normal procedure prescribed " so that all of the train's "systems including the brakes can be freely checked," the incident report reads.

"As per procedure, once the train is again re-commissioned, the brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train left the shed," the report continues before adding that "prima facie, it appears, this was not done".

Staff who then took charge of the train also failed to check whether the braking system was active and took the rakes to the washing area. There the train went up a ramp and was supposed to stop, but since the brakes were inactive, the "train rolled back causing this incident."

The accident was due to human error, the Delhi Metro said based on preliminary findings The accident was due to human error, the Delhi Metro said based on preliminary findings

advertisement

A high-level inquiry into the incident is ongoing and the DMRC has said "Prima facie it appears, to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the enquiry."

The Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government, which has a running a feud with the Delhi Metro over ticket prices, has sought a report from the transport authority. "I have sought a report from DMRC on the derailment of its driverless train during trial run on Kalkaji-Botanical Garden. Shocking lapse ! There can be no compromise on passenger safety," Delhi transport minister Kailash Gehlot tweeted soon after the accident was reported.

The Magenta line will initially link the Botanical Garden station in Noida to Kalkaji Mandir in south Delhi. The line will later be expanded up to Janakpuri West. Botanical Garden will serve as an inter-change station, allowing commuters to switch between the Yellow and Magenta lines.. Delhi Metro accident today: On December 19, during the trial run of the Magenta line, one of the trains reportedly met with an accident as it tore through an iron grill at the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot. Prime Minister Narendra Modi was scheduled to visit on December 25 to inaugurate Delhi Metro’s new Magenta Line which connects Delhi Metro’s Blue line to Violet Line, from Botanical Garden to Kalindi Kunj. As of now, there are no reports of casualties. The Magenta Line came as a breather for many commuters as it will reduce the distance between Noida and South Delhi to a mere 19-minute ride. Explaining the incident, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation issued a press release stating the reason behind the mishap.

In its press release, DMRC has ordered a high-level enquiry into this incident. The enquiry will have a committee of three Executive Directors: Executive Director/ Rolling Stock (Project), Executive Director/ Rolling Stock (O&M), Executive Director/ Operations. The press release explains the entire incident.

READ the full text by DMRC on Delhi Metro accident today:

An incident occurred at 3.40 PM (1540hrs) at the Kalindi Kunj Metro depot today which is under commissioning. A trial train was moved from the workshop without testing the brake system as a result of which, while the train was moving up the ramp for washing, it rolled back and hit the adjacent boundary wall. No person was injured in the incident.

As per normal procedure prescribed, when a train enters the workshop, the brakes of the train are decommissioned so that the train and its systems including the brakes can be freely checked. As per procedure, once the train is again re-commissioned, the brakes should have been tested by the maintenance staff in the depot before the train left the shed. The train movement inside the workshop area is done manually and not by the signalling system.

Prima facie, it appears, this was not done and subsequently, the person who took charge of the train from the maintenance staff also did not check the brake and proceeded with the train up to the washing plant built on a ramp. While stopping at the ramp, since the brakes were not available, the train rolled back causing this incident.

MD, DMRC has ordered a high-level enquiry into this incident by a committee of three officers of the rank of Executive Directors consisting of Executive Director/ Rolling Stock (Project), Executive Director/ Rolling Stock (O&M), Executive Director/ Operations. Prima facie it appears, to be a case of human error and negligence and appropriate action will be taken after the enquiry.

Anuj Dayal (ED/ Corp Comm)

Watch the video of the mishap at the Kalindi Kunj Metro Depot:

Delhi Metro Train crashed into the wall. It happened at Kalindi Kunj depo. PM Narendra Modi will inaugurate the Botanical Garden on the Kalkaji Mandir stretch (Magenta Line) on December 25. pic.twitter.com/vyozISos01 — Shadab Moizee (@shadabmoizee) December 19, 2017

The Metro trains on the Magenta Line will connect nine stations from the Violet Line to Blue Line. The train will run from Kalkaji Mandir, Okhla NSIC, Sukhdev Vihar, Jamia Milia Islamia, Jasola Vihar, Shaheen Bagh, Kalindi Kunj, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden. The Magenta Line is the first line on the Delhi Metro have no drivers. However, drivers will be present on the trains for some time.