YouTube is blaming its auto-moderation tool for removing a live-stream of a women's sex conference.

According to a report from the Daily Dot, the conference, called Women of Sex Tech, had its live feed auto-banned from YouTube just four minutes into the broadcast for allegedly violating the platform's community guidelines.

The conference has reportedly been ongoing for the last five years but was moved online due to the coronavirus pandemic.

YouTube shut out a women's sex tech conference after just four minutes of streaming. The platform blamed an auto-moderation feature (stock)

In a statement to the DailyDot, YouTube said the incident was caused by increased reliance on the algorithm meant to automatically weed out content that breaks YouTube's guidelines

The reliance on auto-moderation has been driven by a lack of human moderators due to constraints brought on by an ongoing the coronavirus pandemic, YouTube said.

'We know that this may result in some videos being removed that do not violate our policies, but this allows us to continue to act quickly and protect our ecosystem,' the spokesperson said.

'If creators think that their content was removed in error, they can appeal decisions and our teams will take a look.'

Motherboard reports that though YouTube's community guidelines are meant to prevent 'sexually gratifying' content as well as nudity and pornography, the entire five-hour conference contained no such material.

Sex tech has only recently found a home in major conferences like CES where toys for women and men were on display this year

'I was so confused, I thought it had to be a glitch considering there was no mention of sex or adult content at that time,' Women of Sex Tech president Alison Falk told Motherboard.

'Considering this isn't a one-time occurrence and there are frequent stories of folks being shadowbanned, demonetized, having their accounts disabled, and so on within our communities, I can't help but wonder what variables within the automation their smart detection has been told to look for that would trigger a violation of inappropriate content,' Falk told Motherboard.. The Women of Sex Tech conference went virtual for the first time in its five-year history last weekend, no thanks to YouTube.

The platform’s automated moderation controls automatically banned the sex tech conference the night before the event was supposed to go live, despite not being in violation of any of YouTube’s sexual content regulations. Women of Sex Tech president Alison Falk said the stream was cut off after four minutes during a test run Friday night. “I was so confused, I thought it had to be a glitch considering there was no mention of sex or adult content at that time,” she told Vice.

A YouTube rep told the Daily Dot the automatic ban was the result of the platform’s increased dependence on automated algorithms instead of human moderators in response to the coronavirus pandemic. “We know that this may result in some videos being removed that do not violate our policies, but this allows us to continue to act quickly and protect our ecosystem,” the spokesperson said in a statement.

The conference was able to continue as scheduled Saturday after Falk and her team were forced to drop “a couple hundred dollars ” to host the show on Crowdcast instead.

While YouTube’s sexual content policies include many restrictions against content “meant to be sexually gratifying” (god forbid), no part of the five-hour conference included any content that violated any of those restrictions. The incident, as Vice noted, is yet another instance of tech companies silencing sex education and sexual speech online and perpetuating a harmful pattern of censorship that routinely threatens sexual expression of all kinds across various internet platforms.

Subscribe here for our free daily newsletter.