ARTICLE TITLE: Facebook Recommended Military Gear Ads Despite Pause on Weapons Accessories Ads
In a statement that did not address BuzzFeed News’ questions about specific ads, pages, or groups, Facebook spokesperson Liz Bourgeois said, “Our teams are working to stay ahead of any militia groups that try to evade” the social network’s ban.

She added, "We don’t allow ads that praise, support, or represent militarized social movements, and ban ads that promote the sale or use of weapons, ammunition, or explosives."

Delaware Sen. Chris Coons said that in light of last week’s assault on the Capitol, Facebook needed to “conduct a robust review of all of its business practices, not just the content it hosts.”

In a statement to BuzzFeed News, he said, “It’s clear after last week’s assault on the Capitol that social media companies, including Facebook, need to take additional steps to prevent violence and extremism from taking root on their platforms — whether by hosting content that incites or organizes violence or by making it easier for those with bad intentions to obtain military gear.”

On Wednesday morning, ads for military-grade tactical gear ads appeared in the News Feed of a TTP-run Facebook account designed to mimic the online habits of someone who followed extremist content on the platform. The year-old account was designed to look like that of a 32-year-old man based in Covington, Kentucky, who follows or is part of more than 75 pages or groups that share pro-Trump memes, election misinformation, or outright calls for violence.

These pages include “RAPID Militia,” “Modern Militia,” and “Appalachian Mountain Patriots” (formerly “Appalachian Oath Keepers”). Facebook banned militant groups in August; the Oath Keepers is a far-right anti-government organization that has been prohibited by the platform.

The TTP account does not post or like any of the content Facebook delivers to it, though Paul does scroll through the feed and follows links for her research. While the account does not follow the pages of Donald Trump or his son Donald Trump Jr., Facebook deemed those two figures to be part of the account’s “interest categories,” which also include the “Republican Party (United States),” “American football,” and “Politics.” Facebook users do not specify their interest categories, which are determined by the social network’s algorithms based on a person’s on-platform activity.

Paul showed BuzzFeed News a live video of the activity on the account’s feed on Wednesday morning.

In the News Feed, an ad for “high-quality American-made holsters” ran above a post falsely claiming that the recent presidential election had been stolen. The ad was targeted to people over the age of 18 whose primary location is the US, according to a Facebook informational panel. A different video ad for a flashlight and laser pointer that could be attached to a semiautomatic rifle was shown next to a post from a group that promotes booglaoo content. Members of the boogaloo movement, a loose network of anti-government extremists who advocate for civil war, have previously been charged with killing law enforcement officers.

While Facebook prohibits ads for firearm sales and gun modifications, advertisers are allowed to use the platform and its audience-targeting capabilities to sell weapon accessories. The advertised products seen by BuzzFeed News included gun belts, steel targets, and body armor.. Facebook has been serving up ads for weapons accessories and body armor alongside election misinformation and insurrection talk in “patriot” and militia groups, according to research by the Tech Transparency Project (TTP), revealing an alarming blind spot in Facebook’s moderation efforts just days before an inauguration threatened by extremist violence.

TTP’s research, shared with BuzzFeed News, showed how Facebook continued to run ads for things like gun holsters and rifle enhancements in these far-right groups after the deadly Jan. 6 U.S. Capitol riot. BuzzFeed also reported that such ads had been flagged internally by concerned Facebook employees.

Facebook promised days later to pause ads for gun accessories and military gear until after the inauguration, but TTP and BuzzFeed continued to find them after Facebook’s announcement. The findings highlight how Facebook profits from extremist content, contributes to radicalization, and struggles to meet its enforcement promises.

TTP spotted the advertising via a monitoring profile it uses to track far-right and militia movements on Facebook. The account’s only activity involves “liking” Facebook pages and joining Facebook groups that are engaged in far-right and militant activity; it does not interact with user posts or communicate in the groups.

Maintaining a profile like this has provided a first-hand look at the kind of content pushed by Facebook’s algorithms. Below is a timeline of TTP’s investigation on the military gear ads.