The Associated Press

Cloverdale, Ind. – Indiana police are investigating a fatal crash involving a Tesla car that rear-ended a fire truck parked along Interstate 70, killing an Arizona woman and seriously injuring her husband.

Derrick N. Monet, 25, of Prescott Valley, Arizona, was behind the wheel of a 2019 Tesla traveling along I-70 in western Indiana’s Putnam County when he failed to the see the parked fire truck Sunday morning and plowed into its rear, said Sgt. Matt Ames with Indiana State Police.

Both Monet and his wife, Jenna N. Monet, 23, also of Prescott Valley, Arizona, were seriously injured. Jenna Monet was later pronounced dead at a Terre Haute hospital.

Police said the Cloverdale Fire Department fire truck was parked along the highway, its emergency lights activated while responding to a single-vehicle crash, when Sunday’s collision occurred, police said.

Ames said Derrick Monet told investigators he regularly uses his Tesla’s autopilot mode, but that “due to the impact of the accident he cannot recall whether or not he had it on at the time of the accident.”

State police are continuing to investigate whether or not the autopilot was activated and planned to contact Tesla as part of their investigation, he said.

Ames said that at the time of Sunday’s crash the Monets were traveling from Arizona to Maryland.. The Tesla that crashed into a parked firetruck on I-70 and killed a 23-year-old in late 2019 was on autopilot, according to a report from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, which is investigating similar incidents.

The auto safety regulator has opened a broad investigation into the electric vehicle's autopilot feature, which it said was in use during at least 11 accidents since 2018.

From Culver City, California, to Miami, Florida, these accidents injured 17 people. The Indiana incident was the only fatality investigated, claiming the life of Jenna N. Monet, who was a passenger when a 2019 Tesla Model 3 struck a parked firetruck in the passing lane of I-70.

From 2020: Agency that investigates 'unique crashes' to look into fatal Tesla wreck

Her husband, Derrick N. Monet, 25, was behind the wheel of the car. He suffered serious injuries in the crash.

Tesla's autopilot feature, introduced in 2015, can brake, accelerate, pass other vehicles and stay within lanes automatically using radar and cameras.

In all the crashes being investigated, Tesla cars on autopilot or Traffic Aware Cruise Control encountered first-responder scenes and hit at least one emergency vehicle. Most happened after dark and with scene control measures in place, like cones or emergency vehicle lights, the NHTSA report said.

2017 Tesla crash:Report concludes driver in deadly Tesla crash was drunk

At the time of the crash on I-70, the firetruck had its emergency lights on, Indiana State Police told IndyStar in 2019.

The NHTSA previously concluded in 2017 that Tesla's autopilot feature was not defective, following a fatal crash in Florida in 2016. But regulators also said then that these driver-assistance programs should not be relied upon in all roadway situations.

A spokesperson issued a similar reminder in a statement to IndyStar Tuesday, saying there is no vehicle on the market that is able to completely drive itself. State laws, too, hold human drivers responsible for the control of the vehicle.

"Certain advanced driving assistance features can promote safety by helping drivers avoid crashes and mitigate the severity of crashes that occur, but as with all technologies and equipment on motor vehicles, drivers must use them correctly and responsibly," the statement reads.

Contact IndyStar transportation reporter Kayla Dwyer at kdwyer@indystar.com or follow her on Twitter @kayla_dwyer17.. . Derrick Monet is suing Tesla after a 2019 accident where the Tesla Model 3 he was driving slammed into the rear of a firetruck in Putnam County, Indiana.

The Model 3 was running on Autopilot at the time of the accident. The suit alleges that the Autopilot system failed to prevent the accident.

His wife, Jenna Monet, died in the accident. At the same time, Derrick suffered multiple fractures in his neck, ribs and femur.

According to the police report, the Tesla failed to take any evasive action. However, the plaintiff says Tesla and multiple unnamed entities that manufactured the Model 3 caused the crash, injuries and damages.

In addition, the lawsuit references a government investigation opened in August 2021 by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, reports CarComplaints.

The NHTSA opened the investigation after several accidents between Tesla’s on Autopilot and parked emergency vehicles. In total, there have been 12 reported accidents.

Moreover, Tesla provided an over-the-air software update to help Autopilot systems detect flashing emergency lights on parked vehicles.

Tesla, for its part, notes that it is the driver’s responsibility to stay alert, drive safely and be in control of the vehicle at all times.

The company is also working with the NHTSA on their active investigation.

Tesla did not comment on the pending suit filed in the US District Court for the Northern District of California (Derrick Monet, v. Tesla Inc., et al.). Follow us today...

Tesla's long-running list of crashes involving its vehicles smashing at full-speed into the rear end of parked first responder vehicles has a new tragic footnote. The latest killed the passenger-side occupant of the vehicle. This latest crash happened this past Sunday morning December 29th, 2019. The accident occurred at 8:00 am in the morning, in dry conditions and in broad daylight. The crash took place on Route I-70 in Indiana. This is the second crash of a Tesla vehicle into a parked firetruck in just this month.

Note: Where are the images? We have opted not to post the images of the crash scene since it involved a fatality. You can view them here if you wish.

We are no longer certain of the exact number of Tesla cars that have smashed into the rear of parked first responder vehicles, the accident list now becoming difficult to manage due to frequency. However, by our estimate, this is the sixth such crash. It is the first we know of that involved the death of an occupant in the Tesla vehicle. However, other crashes have of course resulted in fatalities on many occasions.

Indiana police say that drugs and alcohol are not considered to be a cause of this accident at this time. Police also have not yet said if this crash involved the use of Tesla's Autopilot driver-assist system, often referred to by many as "self-driving" technology. Torque News will update this story if a determination as to Autopilot's involvement is made.

Police say the following are the known circumstances surrounding this latest crash:

"A 2019 Tesla, driven by a Derrick N. Monet, age 25, of Prescott Valley, Arizona, failed to observe the emergency vehicle positioned in the passing lane of I-70, running into the back of the parked fire truck. Derrick Monet and a passenger, his wife, Jenna N. Monet, age 23, also of Prescott Valley, Arizona, received serious injuries from the impact. Both occupants had to be extricated and were transported to the hospital for immediate medical care. Jenna Monet later succumbed to her injuries and was pronounced deceased at Terre Haute Regional Hospital."

As with the many previous crashes, no first responder was injured in this Tesla crash. Below is a partial list of previously reported stories related to Tesla vehicles crashing into the rear of parked first responder vehicles:

-Tesla Model 3 On Autopilot Hits Yet Another Police Vehicle - Why Won't They Stop?

- (August 2018) Third Tesla Crashes Into Back of Firetruck - That's Four Crashes Into Emergency Vehicles This Year

- (January) Tesla Police Blotter News - Tesla Driver Hits Parked Firetruck - Blames Autopilot

- Second Tesla Model S Slams Into the Back Of Firetruck - Occupant Says Car Was In Autopilot Mode

- Another Tesla On Autopilot Hits Another Emergency Vehicle - You Can't Make This Stuff Up

- "Stop This Nonsense": Tesla's Autopilot and Its Problems With Stationary Object Detection

- NTSB Report Eerily Predicts Tesla Model X Autopilot Fatality 6 Months In Advance

- Tesla Tries To Address Autopilot's Fatal Flaw Ahead of Full Self Driving Update

There is no word yet on whether the NTSB will investigate this newest Tesla crash into a firetruck. The agency has investigated prior crashes of this type. We will update our story if the agency opts to look closely at this crash. Media reports on a second fatal crash this same day do confirm that federal investigators are looking into that incident.

Why does Torque News report on Tesla crashes of this type? For two reasons. First, these crashes are unusual and newsworthy since they appear to be almost identical and may be caused by a self-driving system Tesla is evolving into what it refers to as "full-self-driving." Second, in anticipation of a Tesla Autopilot death of a first responder which we feel poses the possibility to bankrupt this public company. In June of 2018, Torque News interviewed an MIT researcher working with Tesla to evaluate Autopilot safety from big data. He told us (on video) "We know there is an issue with the detection of static objects."

Torque News has reached out to Tesla for more details on this crash and asked specifically if Autopilot was being used at the time of the crash. If we receive any added information we will edit this story and indicate the update.

John Goreham is a life-long car nut and recovering engineer. John's focus areas are technology, safety, and green vehicles. In the 1990s, he was part of a team that built a solar-electric vehicle from scratch. His was the role of battery thermal control designer. For 20 years he applied his engineering and sales talents in the high tech world and published numerous articles in technical journals such as Chemical Processing Magazine. In 2008 he retired from that career and dedicated himself to chasing his dream of being an auto writer. In addition to Torque News, John's work has appeared in print in dozens of American newspapers and he provides reviews to many vehicle shopping sites. You can follow John on Twitter, and connect with him at Linkedin.