Follow us today...

A Tesla crashed into the back of a bright red firetruck on Interstate 405 in Culver City California yesterday. Luckily, the driver and first responders were not injured, but the Tesla was clearly a total loss. What makes the story newsworthy is that the Culver City Firefighters Local 1927 tweeted that the driver of the Tesla Model S reported that the luxury electric car was traveling in Autopilot mode when it struck the un-moving huge, red firetruck.

This accident sounds eerily similar to a deadly crash in which a Tesla on Autopilot struck a huge white semi-trailer in its path. In that crash, the NTSB pinned some of the blame on the Tesla Autopilot system.

CBS Local Los Angeles reports that firefighters say the driver said the vehicle was operating on Autopilot self-driving mode when the accident occurred. Tesla, Inc. likes to remind owners, drivers, and fans of the Tesla models equipped with Autopilot that the system is not a level five autonomous driving system, but rather one which aids driving. It requires the driver stay engaged in the operation of the vehicle at all times.

Firefighters and the news media have not reported the exact model of the Tesla in the crash. From the images available it appears as if the sedan is a Model S.

Coincidental to this first responder report of a Tesla crashing on Autopilot, police in Northern California reported this week that a driver they arrested for suspected drunk driving told them the Tesla he was in was operating on Autopilot.. A government report says the driver of a Tesla sedan that slammed into a Culver City firetruck on the 405 Freeway last year was using the car’s Autopilot system when a vehicle in front of him suddenly changed lanes and he didn’t have time to react.

The National Transportation Safety Board said Tuesday that the driver never saw the parked firetruck and didn’t brake. Apparently the man’s 2014 Tesla Model S didn’t brake either.

The report raises further questions about the effectiveness of Tesla’s system, which was in operation before several other crashes including two fatalities in Florida and one in Silicon Valley. Tesla Inc. warns drivers that the system is not fully autonomous and that drivers who use it must be ready to intervene.

Advertisement

The NTSB report didn’t state a cause of the crash. The agency is to issue a final report Wednesday.

The driver of the Tesla in the Jan. 22, 2018, firetruck crash was not hurt. But the NTSB report says he did not have his hands on the steering wheel at the time of the crash.

The firetruck had stopped in the northbound high-occupancy-vehicle lane with its emergency lights flashing as it responded to another crash. The firefighters were also uninjured.

Autos Analysis: Tesla crash highlights a problem: When cars are partly self-driving, humans don’t feel responsible Was Autopilot on when a Tesla Model S smashed into the back of a parked Culver City fire truck on the 405 Freeway on Monday in broad daylight?

The Tesla driver, from Woodland Hills, told the NTSB that he was traveling to work in Los Angeles when the crash happened. He told investigators he was looking forward with his hand rested on his knee while touching the bottom of the steering wheel.

Just before the crash, a large vehicle — a sport utility vehicle or pickup truck — changed lanes in front of him, the driver told the NTSB.

“Although the driver stated that he was looking forward, he was unable to see the firetruck in time enough to avoid the crash. The driver had coffee and a bagel at the time, but he wasn’t sure if either was in his hand when the crash occurred,” the report says.

Advertisement

Cellphone data showed the driver was not using his phone to talk or text in the minutes leading up to the crash.

A statement from a driver in a nearby vehicle provided by Tesla said the driver appeared to be looking down at a cellphone or other device he was holding in his left hand before the crash.

The NTSB determined in September 2017 that design limitations of the Tesla Model S Autopilot played a major role in a May 2016 fatal crash in Florida involving a vehicle operating under Autopilot. But it blamed the crash on an inattentive Tesla driver’s overreliance on technology and a truck driver who made a left turn in front of the car.

The federal government has few regulations governing autonomous vehicles and driver-assist systems that can drive a car under certain circumstances. The systems can significantly reduce crashes, but computer-driven vehicles also can make mistakes.. Tesla Driver Was Drinking Coffee and Eating a Bagel

A driver's inattention, overreliance on his car's advanced driver assistance system, and use of the system inconsistent with manufacturer guidance, coupled with the system permitting driver disengagement from the driving task, led to the Jan. 22, 2018, crash in Culver City, California, according to a National Transportation Safety Board brief issued Wednesday.

The results of the NTSB's investigation of the crash involved a Tesla Model S P85 and a Culver City Fire Department Culver City Engine 42 in the high-occupancy vehicle lane of southbound Interstate 405.

The fire crew was working a motorcycle down call on the 405 Freeway that Monday morning.

There were no injuries reported. However, firefighters on the scene commented that it "scared the heck out of them."

The driver reported the Tesla S was on autopilot and he was not paying attention. Culver City Firefighters at the time reminded everyone to "Please stay alert while driving!"

In response to requests for comment at the time, a Tesla Inc. spokesperson didn't address the specific accident, but they pointed out that autopilot requires the attention of the driver.

"Autopilot is intended for use only with a fully attentive driver," the spokesperson said.

The driver kept his hands off the wheel for all but 51 seconds of the final drive segment and received numerous alerts to place his hands back on the wheel, the documents showed. Tesla Inc. did not immediately comment.

The fire truck was unoccupied, and the driver was not injured in the incident.

"I was having a coffee and a bagel. And all I remember, that truck, and then I just saw the boom in my face and that was it," the man behind the wheel told the NTSB.

He did not remember precisely what he was doing at the time of the crash but could have been changing the radio or drinking coffee. Records show the driver was not using his cellphone to text or talk at the time of the crash, the NTSB said.

The response to a collision in the northbound freeway lanes 25 minutes earlier left a California Highway Patrol vehicle parked on the left shoulder of southbound I-405 and the Culver City Fire Department engine parked diagonally across the southbound HOV lane.

Emergency lights were active on both vehicles. The Tesla, which had its "Autopilot" system engaged, was traveling in the HOV lane, behind another vehicle. After the lead vehicle changed lanes to the right, the Tesla remained in the HOV lane, accelerated and struck the rear of the fire truck at a recorded speed of about 31 mph.

A forward collision warning alert occurred 0.49 seconds prior to impact but the automatic emergency braking system did not engage. The driver's hands were not detected on the steering wheel during this sequence nor did the driver apply steering or braking prior to impact.

The NTSB determined the probable cause for the crash was the Tesla driver's lack of response to the fire truck parked in his lane, due to his inattention and overreliance on the car's advanced driver assistance system; the Tesla's "Autopilot" design which permitted the driver to disengage from the driving task; and the driver's use of the system in ways inconsistent with guidance and warnings from Tesla.

Culver City Fire Department Engine 42 was dispatched to the Belair fire as part of a strike team from several westside fire departments.. 