ARTICLE TITLE: Tesla Model 3 Crashed into Police Patrol Car on Connecticut Highway
Follow us today...

Yet another Tesla on Autopilot has crashed at full-speed into the back of yet another first responder's vehicle. Tesla cars seem to have an affinity for finding and smashing into police cars and fire trucks stopped doing their work on our roadways. Why can't Tesla, who claims to be about to release a "full-self-driving" version of its driver-assist technology, make it stop?

The Latest Tesla On Autopilot Crash

The latest crash comes this week. Police stopped to assist a stranded motorist on the highway. Not only did police have their emergency lights flashing, but they also had used road flares to signal to alert motorists than they should slow down and proceed with caution.

Related Story From 2018: Another Tesla On Autopilot Hits Another PoliceVehicle - You Can't Make This Stuff Up

Police say that an inattentive driver in a Tesla Model 3 using Autopilot, Tesla's "self-driving" driver-assist system then slammed into their patrol car. And the Tesla then kept on driving. Connecticut State Police report that after the crash, "The operator of the Tesla continued to slowly travel northbound before being stopped several hundred feet ahead by the second Trooper on scene."

Police say that the driver admitted to using the Autopilot system at the time of the crash and that the driver was not paying attention to the road, but relying on the Tesla system to keep himself, police, and other motorists safe.

Tesla History Of Autopilot Crashes

Tesla's Autopilot has been in control of Tesla automobiles during numerous crashes, with multiple fatalities. Tesla claims that drivers are supposed to remain in control with hands on the wheel at all times. However, Elon Musk himself has been videotaped not doing so, as has his (former) wife.

In addition to the fatal crashes where Model S and Model X cars have crashed on Autopilot killing the occupants of the Tesla vehicles, Tesla vehicles on Autopilot have crashed into the back of numerous fire trucks and at least two police vehicles.

Another Lucky First Responder

Tesla's Autopilot system has yet to kill an officer, AMT, or firefighter on duty, but it seems like it is just a matter of time with so many past crashes of this type. Connecticut State Police say with regard to this latest crash, "Fortunately, no one involved was seriously injured, but it is apparent that this incident could have been more severe."

The occupant in the Tesla operating on Autopilot was issued a misdemeanor summons for Reckless Driving and Reckless Endangerment according to police.

Torque News has reported on Tesla Autopilot crashes and deaths since 2016. Here is a list of related stories:

- (August 2018) Third Tesla Crashes Into Back of Firetruck - That's Four Crashes Into Emergency Vehicles This Year

- (January) Tesla Police Blotter News - Tesla Driver Hits Parked Firetruck - Blames Autopilot

- Second Tesla Model S Slams Into the Back Of Firetruck - Occupant Says Car Was In Autopilot Mode

- Report: Model X In Latest Tesla Autopilot Death Accelerated And Steered Into Barrier

- Another Tesla On Autopilot Hits Another Emergency Vehicle - You Can't Make This Stuff Up

- "Stop This Nonsense": Tesla's Autopilot and Its Problems With Stationary Object Detection

- NTSB Report Eerily Predicts Tesla Model X Autopilot Fatality 6 Months In Advance

- Tesla Tries To Address Autopilot's Fatal Flaw Ahead of Full Self Driving Update

You can view additional images and read additional facts about this latest Autopilot crash at the CT State Police Facebook Page.

In addition to covering green vehicle topics, John Goreham covers safety, technology, and new vehicle news at Torque News. You can follow John on Twitter at @johngoreham.. This past Saturday, some typical police activity turned chaotic after a Tesla Model 3 slammed into a police cruiser on the side of I-95 in Connecticut.

The scene, which until the crash was simply State Police responding to a disabled vehicle on the freeway, turned wild as the Model 3 first hit the police car, continued on to hit the disabled vehicle and finally came to a stop with some assistance from a second state trooper.

The driver told police he was checking on his dog in the back seat and had Tesla's Autopilot system engaged. Tesla does not advertise Autopilot as a completely self-driving system, though the name remains controversial, with critics saying it overpromises its abilities. Tesla did not immediately respond to a request for comment on this incident.

No one was seriously injured in the crash, including the dog, according to the police statement on Facebook. The Connecticut State Police took the time, however, to remind drivers there are no self-driving cars on sale today.

"According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, although a number of vehicles have some automated capabilities, there are no vehicles currently for sale that are fully automated or self-driving," the statement reads. "Regardless of your vehicle's capabilities, when operating a vehicle your full attention is required at all times to ensure safe driving."

The crash continues to highlight the controversies that automated systems bring in their marketing and capabilities, though Tesla's Autopilot continues to be the most high-profile. Two other crashes, one in California and another in Florida, have previously drawn widespread attention to the system.