A woman was left shocked after googling the phrase 'unprofessional hairstyles at work' and seeing that the results were all pictures of black women.

Bonnie Kamona, from Botswana, posted on Twitter: 'I saw a tweet saying "Google unprofessional hairstyles for work". I did. Then I checked the "professional' ones",' which she discovered to her horror were all images of white women.

A screengrab of the masters student's discovery has since incited a flurry of messages on social media from users branding Google 'racist.'

Scroll down for video

Bonnie Kamona, from Botswana, searched in Google for 'unprofessional hairstyles' and found only black women

Bonnie then tweeted the results including screengrabs showing what came up for unprofession, top left, and professional, top right

@SaintWalker98 tweeted: 'Holy s***, that's racist AF.'

However, another user @KhaliRamah also posted that the results were not 'rocket science,' as it showed black people versus white people and he called it 'racist.'

Many people googled it for themselves to see the results with their own eyes.

Raj Palsingh posted: 'It is so bizarre I had to Google the same thing for myself' But he posted a screengrab showing the exact same findings.

@Jor93 tweeted: 'WTF that is ridiculous! They look amazing and totally normal. Better than any hairstyle I wear to work.'

Twitter users were astounded by the findings and couldn't believe the black women were labelled as looking 'unprofessional'

Some Twitter users tried it for themselves, pictured, because they didn't believe that would come up

While Ron Flexico tried the same search on another search engine to see if the results would differ.

He tried it out using Bing instead and found searching 'professional hairstyles' did come up with some black women as well, with one woman shown with her hair in a natural curled style.

While singer Brandy was included with her hair in a low-slung bun and a black model was seen with her hair in a top-knot style.

Some Twitter users explained why the results may show this, saying the results are a reflection of the amount of racist talk on the internet.

Derek Hopper tweeted: 'If forums are full of people saying "cornrows" or "dreads" are unprofessional, that's what Google will show.'

A Twitter user tried it on another search engine, Bing, which had less stark results and included black women for 'professional hairstyles'

A Twitter user explained it was down to what other people had said online, which Google echoed and said it was a 'societal problem'

Raj Palsingh replied this explanation didn't hold up as 'none of the images showed cornrows or dreads. Just black women with nice natural hairstyles.'

Google told Metro.co.uk: ‘This is fundamentally a societal problem — there are persistent and problematic biases, and they’re quite pervasive in the media, on the web, etc – meta-tagging their images with their own descriptions.

‘Search engines in turn reflect what’s on the web. This is not unique to our search engine; Yahoo! and Bing show similar results.

‘We welcome feedback and we’re always working to improve our search results. As a company we strongly value a diversity of perspectives, ideas and cultures — these search results do not reflect Google’s view on the matter.’. The subject of women's hair choices in the workplace has long been a fraught topic, and it's infinitely more so for women of color who embrace their natural hair texture. It's the perfect storm of sexism and racism, and it's just the worst. While it's not untrue to say that we've made strides when it comes to making natural hair better understood and celebrated on a mainstream level, there's still a depressingly long way to go. The latest public display of the extent to which this disturbing sexism-racism hybrid is still at play? The shocking, racially charged results that pop up when you do a Google image search for "unprofessional hairstyles for work."

The issue first caught people's attention when Twitter user @BonKamona tweeted a side-by-side comparison of the results of searches for "professional" and "unprofessional" hairstyles for work.

X content This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

The divide is pretty startling: The images that the algorithm deemed "professional" were overwhelmingly white and straight-haired, while the "unprofessional" ones showed almost exclusively models of color with curly hair (and Elizabeth Banks as Effie Trinket from The Hunger Games trilogy, which we have to agree probably isn't an ideal work look).

Another user, @MalumDube, pointed out that one hairstyle seems to magically transform from "professional" to "unprofessional" when transferred from Rachael McAdams to a black model:. This is a big problem. Although natural hair appreciation is something we’ve seen more of recently — with everything from inspiring hashtags to more appearances on the runways and red carpet, there are still tons of instances where girls have to deal with backlash for embracing their coils. We’ve seen girls get kicked off cheerleading teams for curls, get in trouble at school for being “untidy,” and feel pressured to chemically straighten their strands because of the negative connotations linked to natural hair. And this is yet another, truly shocking instance that keeps the stereotype alive.

Many people reacting to this discovery have gone on to explain that once you actually do click on the articles associated with the pictures in the search, they are informative pieces that aim to call out issues black women face in the professional work place because of their hair. But, even so, by grouping these pictures in a way that connects them directly to the word unprofessional, minus context, fuel is only added to the fire.

Because most of the articles are geared to breaking down prejudices, it’s seems that this is a very real algorithm oversight. But regardless of how the divide occurred, this proves that we still have a long way to go.

Related: The TSA Searched My Hair Because I’m a Black Woman with Braids — And It’s Not Okay. Recently, an MBA student named Rosalia discovered something alarming: Googling “unprofessional hairstyles for work” yielded image results mainly of black women with natural hair, while searching for the “professional” ones offered pictures of coiffed, white women. Often the hair styles themselves were not vastly different -- only the hair type and the wearer’s skin.

Rosalia’s tweet has since been retweeted thousands of times - more than 6,200 in the first 24 hours, she says - as her discovery sparked discussion on implicit racial biases against black people in the workplace. Can an algorithm itself be racist? Or is it only reflecting the wider social landscape?

I saw a tweet saying "Google unprofessional hairstyles for work". I did. Then I checked the 'professional' ones 🙃🙃🙃 pic.twitter.com/5KLg7FZ6Hq — Rosalia (@BonKamona) April 5, 2016

It seems hard to remember a time when you couldn’t just “Google Images” a word or phrase and see a picture of it instantaneously. According to Google executive chairman Eric Schmidt, the feature was introduced in the year 2000. It was in response to sudden, overwhelming demand: Jennifer Lopez famously wore a plummeting, green Versace gown to that year’s Grammy awards and suddenly everyone wanted to see it. No one was Googling it just to read about it, that was for sure.

Now, Google Images is a practically thoughtless part of the way we use the web, instantaneously offering us a vast gallery of relevant images in response to a single word, phrase or query. It also makes further suggestions. If you search pie, you’ll see classic confections both whole and sliced, as well as some available subsets. Apple pie, meat pie? Did you mean the mathematical number, maybe? Google Images thinks of everything!

We’ve always conceived of search engines as arcane but neutral creatures, obedient only to our will and to the precious logic of information. Older engines from the advent of the internet reflected this: Remember “Ask Jeeves,” the genteel butler? Dogpile, which would “fetch” things for you? Despite this fantasy, the things engines and their algorithms are able to know and to find are influenced by the content we give them to work with, which means they may reflect our own biases.



On a basic level, Google Images primarily figures out who or what is shown in a picture by judging the text and captions that surround it. It’s possible though that some rudimentary image analysis - the kind that can tell a face from a landscape - is also involved. In the case of the great hair debate, Google Images seems to have taken many of the pictures of black women wearing the “unprofessional” hairstyles were from blogs, articles and Pinterest boards. Many of these are by people of colour explicitly discussing and protesting against racist attitudes to hair. One image led me to a post criticising Hampton University’s ban on dreadlocks and cornrows; another was linked with a post celebrating natural hair and the “ridiculous” pressure to straighten it for the office; here’s a rejection of the idea that big, natural curls are “distracting” in a newsroom.



Ultimately, the algorithm is mirroring conversations about “unprofessional hair” biases, not making a ruling. In fact, just a day after Rosalia’s tweet went viral, memes about the discrepancy, screencaps of the tweet itself, and other recent related images topped the results of the Google Images search for “unprofessional hairstyles for work”. But it still raises questions about the role of algorithms in how we use the web, and pokes a few holes in the utopian fantasy of what the internet is for.



View image in fullscreen The results of image searches for ‘men’ (left) and ‘women’ (right) on Google. Photograph: Google

For example, search for the word “man”, and you get images almost entirely of white men, albeit of varying ages. A search for the word “woman” also reveals an overwhelming majority of young, white women. Considering that the majority of the global population is non-white, we do immediately see how white, western-centric biases - from race and gender beliefs to cultural standards of beauty and value - dominate the very way the web works and what stories it tells about humanity.



The algorithm doesn’t mean to be imperialist, of course. It does what it’s designed to do: reflect the content that it has available. But the dream of the web as a “great equaliser” remains only that, and the fantasy of a truly non-judgmental, universal digital servant who shows us the true size and scope of the world is still unfulfilled.



Is this something Google can “solve for”, perhaps by tagging and prioritising images differently? And if so, ought it to? These questions get at the very identity of “search” as a digital concept: is its purpose to reflect and reinforce what its users feel, do and believe? Or is it to show us a fuller picture of the world and all things contained in it as they really are? Google Images was conceived in response to what people most wanted to see. Maybe it hasn’t decided yet what we most need to see.

