Federal vehicle safety regulators in Michigan have launched an investigation into a new accident involving a Tesla Model Y electric vehicle that crashed into a stationary police car while driving in autopilot mode.

During the crash this Wednesday, a Tesla Model Y crashed into a blue Dodge Charger sedan. At that moment, the policeman stopped to record the accident of another vehicle, the driver of which hit a deer. The police car was parked with the emergency lights on, with part of it in the far right lane.

Officials said neither the officer nor the 22-year-old Tesla driver suffered any injuries. According to the officer, the driver reported that the car was moving in autopilot mode. The accident occurred in Eaton County, located about 100 miles northwest of Detroit.

The incident was just another in a series of accidents involving Tesla electric vehicles that drew criticism from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). At the same time, this is the second collision involving a Tesla car in Michigan in the last week. Prior to this, a Tesla electric car drove under a truck, while the passengers were badly injured.

Tesla has not yet commented on the situation.

Gizchina News of the week Join GizChina on Telegram

Tesla and Samsung working together to develop a 5nm chip for autonomous driving

According to previous reports, the Tesla development team is working hard to develop a more sophisticated artificial intelligence framework. It will provide its vehicles with autonomous driving capabilities. South Korean Media Asia E reported that Samsung is currently developing a 5nm chip that provides computing power for Tesla’s self-driving cars. 5nm is the most cutting-edge standard we have in the market right now. It will dictate the path for the companies in the next years as 3nm may only become a reality by 2023. That said, just a few companies already have domain over the 5nm standard, and Samsung certainly is one of them.

Samsung currently provides 14nm chips for Tesla. Now, the companies are expanding their cooperation. The in-vehicle infotainment system uses a variety of chips such as processors, neural network processors (NPU), security integrated circuits, memory and display drive ICs (DDI). It is a core technology that processes information from sensors, lighting, and communications in the car and transmits it to the screen to enable the vehicle to achieve fully autonomous driving. As Tesla is planning to modernize its setup, Samsung is focusing its development in this direction.

Samsung believes that it has the ability to skip the research and development of 7nm chips. So it will immediately start research and development of 5nm chips for cars. If the company manages to successfully make this, the brand may find a supply agreement with Tesla.

This goes against certain rumors pointing to Tesla’s acquisition by Apple. Anyway, we have to wait for more details in this regard.. A Tesla operating in the vehicle's driver-assist system known as Autopilot struck a police car March 17, 2021 in Michigan, officials said in a tweet.

DETROIT – Federal vehicle safety regulators opened a new investigation into a second Tesla crash this month after a Model Y that was reportedly operating in Autopilot struck a stationary police car early Wednesday morning in Michigan, according to officials.

The National Highway Transportation Safety Administration was already investigating an unrelated Tesla collision in Detroit less than a week ago.

"Consistent with NHTSA's vigilant oversight and robust authority over the safety of all motor vehicles and equipment, including automated technologies, we have launched a Special Crash Investigation team to investigate the crash," NHTSA said in a statement to CNBC.

Autopilot is Tesla's driver assistance system that comes standard with all of its newer models.

In the Wednesday crash, a driver in a Tesla who said it was on Autopilot struck an officer's blue Dodge Charger sedan as troopers were investigating a crash between a deer and a different vehicle at 1:12 a.m., according to a post by the Michigan State Police on Twitter. The police car was parked and partially sitting in the right lane of a highway with its emergency lights on, Lt. Brian Oleksyk confirmed in an email to CNBC.

The crash is the latest in a string of accidents involving Tesla's all-electric cars that have drawn criticism from vehicle safety advocates and probes by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, or NHTSA. This was also the second collision involving a Tesla vehicle in Michigan over the last week.

Officials said no injuries were sustained by the officers or the unnamed 22-year-old driver of the Tesla, who was issued citations for failure to move over and driving with a suspended license. The driver told police the vehicle was operating in Autopilot, according to Oleksyk. The accident occurred in Eaton County, located about 100 miles northwest of Detroit.

Tesla did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The NHTSA has previously opened probes into more than a dozen crashes that were thought to involve Tesla's advanced driver assist systems, including Autopilot.

The most recent probe involved a "violent" crash last week in Detroit of a Tesla sedan and a tractor trailer. Detroit Police Assistant Chief David LeValley said Tuesday at a news briefing "that all indications" are that the Tesla was not in Autopilot at the time of the crash, but the investigation was still underway. He cited statements made by the driver and video showing "evasive maneuvers being conducted just before the crash." The NHTSA and Detroit police have not yet examined data from the vehicle.

Tesla's systems include a standard Autopilot package. A more advanced option marketed as full self-driving is sold today for $10,000. The company's Autopilot and full self-driving technology do not make Tesla vehicles safe for operation without a driver at the wheel. Some customers who purchase the full self-driving option also get access to a "beta" version to try the newest features that are being added to the system before all bugs are worked out.

The systems can control many aspects of the car, but "active driver supervision" is required, according to Tesla's website.. A Tesla on autopilot mode crashed into a Michigan state trooper’s patrol car early Wednesday morning, according to a local report.

The car, driven by a 22-year-old man, hit the police vehicle in the Lansing area at about 1:10 a.m., as the trooper was responding to another car that struck a deer, WLNS-TV reported.

Nobody was injured in the crash. The Tesla driver was issued two citations for driving with a suspended license and failure to move over.

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration sent a team to Michigan to investigate.

It’s the second time in less than a week a Tesla has crashed in the state. In the first incident in Detroit, authorities have said it appears the driver was not using the car’s autopilot mode, according to WDIV-TV.

Tesla has said previously that its autopilot and “full self-driving” are driver-assistance systems and that the driver must be ready to intervene at all times.

The Tesla after the crash. Twitter

The company has been criticized by the National Transportation Safety Board for failing to adequately monitor drivers to make sure they are paying attention.

With Post wires. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is investigating another Tesla crash in which Autopilot was allegedly in use.

The crash took place outside of Lansing, Michigan, when the driver of a Tesla Model Y smashed into a state trooper’s cruiser. Michigan police said the driver was using Autopilot, Tesla’s advanced driver-assistance system (ADAS), at the time of the crash. No one was injured, but the government sent investigators to the scene to determine how Autopilot may have contributed to the crash.

“NHTSA is aware of the incident involving a Tesla vehicle near Lansing, Michigan,” a spokesperson said in a statement. “Consistent with NHTSA’s vigilant oversight and robust authority over the safety of all motor vehicles and equipment, including automated technologies, we have launched a Special Crash Investigation team to investigate the crash.”

This is the latest crash involving a Tesla to be scrutinized by federal investigators

This is the latest crash involving a Tesla to be scrutinized by federal investigators. NHTSA has sent teams to inspect similar crashes involving Teslas that took place in recent weeks in Houston and Detroit. Local law enforcement has said it doesn’t believe Autopilot was involved in the Detroit crash, but they have yet to make the same determination in Houston.

This is also the latest incident to involve a driver using Autopilot crashing into a stationary object. There have been at least two fatal crashes in which a Tesla owner has smashed into a stopped vehicle, and Tesla has yet to address it in any meaningful way.

Tesla didn’t respond to a request for comment, likely because the company has dissolved its press office and typically doesn’t respond to media requests anymore. In the past, Tesla has warned its customers that Autopilot is not an autonomous driving system and still requires constant attention to the road while in use.

At the same time, the company recently rolled out a beta version of Autopilot called “Full Self Driving” that has given many people the false impression that Tesla vehicles are autonomous and don’t require drivers to pay attention to the road. Tesla recently expanded the number of people who have access to the beta software. “Still be careful, but it’s getting mature,” CEO Elon Musk tweeted recently.

Tesla has a checkered history with the NHTSA, the federal agency that can issue recalls and investigate automobile crashes. The agency has investigated multiple fatal crashes involving Autopilot. Last year, the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that the ADAS was one of the probable causes of a fatal 2018 crash, in which a California man was killed after his Model X smashed into a concrete barrier. Later, the chair of the safety board said Tesla was ignoring its recommendations. And last year, a spokesperson for NHTSA said the agency was “monitoring” the rollout of Tesla’s Full Self Driving software.. Automotive Newsreports that a Tesla struck a Michigan State Police vehicle that was stationary on a freeway early on Wednesday. According to police, the "Autopilot" driver-assistance system was engaged, and neither the driver nor the system avoided the crash. A police Twitter account indicated there were no injuries. It's not apparent if the Tesla or driver attempted to slow down to avoid the impact. The driver was also cited for driving with a suspended license, according to the tweet.

The police car, a Dodge Charger, suffered serious damage to the rear driver's corner. It's unclear what damage the Tesla suffered, or which model of Tesla was involved, though it appears to be a Model 3 sedan. But this impact comes right on the heels of another troubling incident in Detroit on Monday, in which a Tesla ran through an intersection and became wedged under a tractor-trailer. AsAutomotive Newsreports, NHTSA is investigating and Autopilot may be involved.

Advertisement

No car is immune from a crash, even cars with advanced emergency braking systems or fully attentive drivers. But the rash of Autopilot-related Tesla crashes is troubling, and many industry observers lay some blame on Tesla, for both the design of the driver assistance system itself as well as on how it is marketed. Between the Autopilot name (and the forthcoming Full Self Driving option, which Tesla currently sells to customers with the promise of future capability when technology catches up), it isn't hard to gather the impression that driver attention is not required when the system isn't engaged.

That is categorically untrue at the time of this writing, however. There are no fully autonomous vehicles available for purchase by the public, and even Tesla's most advanced system currently available is a driver-assistance system, not a full-blown self-driving, actual autonomous system. It requires an attentive driver be available to resume control at any time, prompted or not. As we've said in the past, the system may improve, but the ability to tune out and let the vehicle drive itself is a long way off.

For now, let this crash serve as yet another reminder that driver assistance systems are an aid, not a replacement for attentiveness. We're glad no one was hurt in this incident. Be safe out there.

READ MOREVolkswagen's "Project Trinity" Aims for Tesla's Jugular

Tesla CEO Says New Model S and X EVs Select Drive and Reverse Gears Without Driver Input

2021.5 Tesla Model X Goes Under the Knife, Adds Tri-Motor Plaid Trim. EATON COUNTY, MI – A Tesla on autopilot hit a Michigan State Police car early Wednesday morning, officials confirmed.

The MSP car was parked with its emergency lights on while investigating a car-deer crash at 1:12 a.m., March 17 on I-96 near Waverly Road in Eaton County, when the Tesla hit it, police said.

The Tesla was on autopilot and failed to move over, hitting the patrol car, police said.

The autopilot function means the car can “steer, accelerate and brake automatically within its lane,” per Tesla’s website. It does not make the vehicle autonomous and requires supervision, per the website.

Federal agency to investigate Tesla-semi crash that left 2 critically injured

The 22-year-old Lansing man in the Tesla was cited for failure to move over and driving while license suspended.

No one was injured in the crash, police said.

Read more from MLive:

Millions of Americans to receive stimulus checks on St. Paddy’s Day, did your treasure find you?

Nurse allegedly stole COVID-19 vaccines from Michigan clinic

Jackson County communities receive $450K from marijuana sales tax