OUR EXPERIENCED ATTORNEYS FIGHT FOR YOU

Our team of experienced attorneys has earned a reputation as the top defender of California lemon law rights. Specifically, we earned the #1 lemon law verdict in 2017 and 2018, with settlements well above what other lemon law firms secure for their clients.

We fight for you. Our expert team of California lemon law attorneys works around the clock to help you get out of your defective vehicle and get your money back!. ​A U.S. District Court judge will allow a class-action lawsuit to proceed against Nissan North America over what owners claim is a faulty Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) system, reports CarComplaints.com. The lawsuit includes all 2017-2019 Nissans with AEB systems and alleges that the systems sometimes brake for things that don't exist.

AEB systems are there to alert drivers of a possible imminent frontal collision, braking if the driver doesn't respond to the warning by putting on the brakes themselves. Nissan's AEB systems use radar to determine pedestrians, other vehicles and other potential obstacles ahead of a car, and owners have complained of it malfunctioning while driving the car.

The lawsuit alleges that Nissan's AEB system either slows the car down dramatically or comes to a complete, abrupt stop even when there's nothing ahead of a car. According to CarComplaints.com, 14 crashes and five injuries in Nissan Rogues have been blamed on malfunctioning AEB systems, plus roughly 1,400 complaints have been filed with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration about the AEB system malfunctioning in various Nissans across the line.

Plaintiffs say that the defect is the most dangerous when it arises in intersections, over bridges, over railroad tracks and in parking lots.

The class-action lawsuit claims that dealerships were sent technical service bulletins about AEB system malfunctions in the 2017-2018 Rogue, Rogue Hybrid and Rogue Sport, CarComplaints.com reports. This was used as proof that Nissan knows of the problems, but we already know the company is aware of the issue, as it responded to an NHTSA information request about it. As stated in their response, the company does not believe the issue is major enough to trigger a recall.

Despite the technical service bulletin, one plaintiff, Lakeita Kemp, alleged that dealerships refused to fix the issue when customers complained about AEB problems. Kemp claims her 2019 Altima started having the issue only a few weeks after buying it.

Judge William L. Campbell Jr. of the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee dismissed most of Nissan's motion to dismiss the lawsuit.. WHICH VEHICLES HAVE PROBLEMS WITH AEB?

The following vehicles may be equipped with faulty Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) systems:

2017–Present Nissan Rogue

2017–Present Nissan Pathfinder

2017–Present Nissan Murano

2017–Present Nissan Altima

2017–Present Nissan Maxima

2017–Present Nissan Armada

2017–Present Nissan Leaf

2017–Present Nissan Sentra

2018–Present Nissan Kicks

2018–Present Nissan Versa

The vehicles listed above may be included in one or more class action lawsuits. However, other vehicle models may have Nissan AEB problems. Even if some Nissan models are not represented in one or more class action lawsuits, they may still experience recurring issues with their Automatic Emergency Braking systems.

If your vehicle experiences recurring issues with its autonomous emergency braking system, you may need to opt out of one or more class action lawsuits before a deadline. The same can also be said if you have problems with the autonomous emergency braking warning light.

Those who fail to opt out often waive their right to pursue individual lemon law claims. As a result, they may receive only a meager cut of the final settlement.. Advanced driving aids have been slighted once again. This time, the Center for Auto Safety is asking Nissan to issue a safety recall on several models it believes have received too many customer complaints about their automatic emergency braking systems.

It also claims the manufacturer is already aware of the situation, after filing an public-information requests that showed Nissan being in possession of more than 1,400 complaints and field reports alleging the systems are activating when they shouldn’t. The company is also on the receiving end of some lawsuits over the matter.

We’d hate to harp on Nissan more than necessary. The manufacturer already has a laundry list of problems it’s hoping to solve, and there’s clear evidence that advanced driving aids are acting goofy across the board — especially as they become more commonplace. Last week, we reported on another AAA assessment encompassing multiple brands that once again showed just how reliable these electronic nannies aren’t.

However, the Center for Auto Safety is singularly focused on false positives for the braking system. Customers report cars slamming on the brakes at highway speeds with no obstacle posing any immediate danger.

It wants a recall, and soon.

“False braking not only endangers the occupants of the Nissan vehicle but puts all surrounding road users at risk,” Jason Levine, executive director of the safety advocacy group, said on Thursday. “It undermines consumer trust in the long-term safety benefits of such technology.”

According to Automotive News, the Center for Auto Safety requested the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) investigate the situation based off 87 customer complaints issued prior to March of 2019. The NHTSA agreed and the number of complaints skyrocketed, encouraging the safety group to renew suggestions that a recall is in order.

From AN:

In written complaints contained within the federal agency’s database, motorists describe instances of abrupt braking at highway speeds. Specific types of infrastructure also appeared to be triggers for problems — bridges, railroad tracks and parking garages, for example. Some consumers reported multiple instances of the phantom braking.

This June, Nissan submitted documents to NHTSA that acknowledged 1,233 consumer complaints related to the problem, which came from owners of the Rogue, Rogue Sport and Sentra sedan. Nissan said it knew of at least 30 allegations of “minor collisions” stemming from automatic emergency braking incidents, and 10 reports alleging “minor injuries.” Between consumer complaints and field reports, Nissan listed 1,460 unique VIN records related to allegations of the braking problems.

Those come from Rogue and Rogue Sport vehicles produced in the 2017 to 2020 model years, and Sentras made in the 2018 and 2019 model years.

To date, the automaker has issued technical service bulletins and a service campaign that address the problem and says customers can take their vehicles to dealerships for software updates.

Nissan has been adamant that it’s working with the NHTSA to address the issue and is committed to product safety, but the Center for Auto Safety doesn’t believe enough has been done since 2019. It wants to see the units recalled.

“Service campaigns are a weak shadow of safety recalls,” said Levine. “They do not require the same notification of consumers, are not easily searchable by new owners of used vehicles and require no long-term reporting by the manufacturer to ensure successful repair rates.”

[Image: Nissan]. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

March 21, 2019

Contact: Grace Garver, (202) 328-7700, [email protected]

Center for Auto Safety Calls on NHTSA to Investigate Malfunctioning Automatic Emergency Braking System on 2017-2018 Nissan Rogue Vehicles

Today, the Center for Auto Safety (“the Center”) petitioned the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) to initiate a safety defect investigation into false activation of the Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) system that is placing Rogue owners and other road users in danger. There have been at least 87 consumer complaints of unintended braking after activation of Nissan’s AEB, yet in violation of federal law Nissan has attempted to address the defect as a service matter rather than a safety problem.

The Center, founded in 1970, is a member-supported, independent, non-profit consumer advocacy organization dedicated to improving vehicle safety, quality, and fuel economy.

All of the complaints found in NHTSA’s database indicate that the AEB engaged when no obstruction was posing a threat to the path of the vehicle. Many complaints indicate that the braking is abrupt or forceful, endangering both the Rogue occupants and people in nearby vehicles, who are forced to avoid a collision with a suddenly stopped vehicle. Over 400,000 Nissan Rogues were sold in both 2017 and 2018.

“When automatic emergency braking works it is an important technological achievement in vehicle safety.” said Jason Levine, executive director of the Center for Auto Safety. “However, when it performs erratically and suddenly stops the car for no reason, it endangers both the car’s occupants and any following cars that may crash into the unexpectedly stopped vehicle. Just as dangerous, this defect is causing some owners to manually turn off the braking feature when they start their car, eliminating its potential safety benefits. Nissan has issued a service bulletin because it knows it has a problem. The time has come for either Nissan, or NHTSA, to be sure that everyone who owns a Nissan Rogue knows about it as well.”

Nissan has attempted to address this defect of unintended braking by issuing a Technical Service Bulletin (TSB) to dealers, but with no impetus or guarantee that owners are notified of a safety hazard or provided an opportunity to have the condition repaired. Moreover, by attempting to avoid a recall, the services currently being offered to Nissan owners are only covered under their warranty for a limited time, instead of the much more robust consumer protection available under a recall.

Today, the Center is petitioning NHTSA to conduct a formal investigation and make a determination that the defective Rogue automatic emergency braking system presents an unreasonable risk to safety – which would result in all Rogue owners being provided notification of, and given the opportunity to receive, Nissan’s existing repair for this problem. Every week brings more instances of these dangerous emergency braking failures to light. Based on the number of complaints and the large numbers of Rogues on the road, it is reasonable to conclude that this defect may unnecessarily cause fatalities or serious injuries—if it has not done so already.

The Center for Auto Safety petitioned NHTSA on January 13, 2016 to not only mandate AEB technology on every new vehicle, but to write a performance standard against which such technology – and advertising claims about the performance of such technology – could be measured. A petition which was denied. “The ability of correctly performing safety technology to save lives is unquestionable,” Levine said. “What remains unanswered is why there is no standard to determine success by each individual manufacturer, or why NHTSA continues to allow this technology to be sold as a luxury instead of a necessity.”

A few examples of the complaints the Center found in NHTSA’s files:

2018 Nissan Rogue – NHTSA ID No. 11089960 – Westbury, NY

The emergency braking engages without reason. This has led to 2 near misses. Once the car just stopped in the road. I thought it might have misinterpreted a snow pile. Then, driving over a train crossing, the car just stopped. Luckily I was able to get it moving before a train came. Very scary! When I called the service department, they were not very concerned. They thought there would be a software fix in a few weeks and I should just shut off the emergency braking feature until then! I paid extra for this feature that is most likely going to get me in an accident!!! Crazy!! I believe a recall is needed asap before someone gets killed.

2017 Nissan Rogue – NHTSA ID No. 11186903 – Gross Pointe Park, MI

While the vehicle was in motion on both city streets and interstate highways the automatic emergency brake (AEB) has activated when there wasn’t any traffic or obstacles present. At one time on the highway it almost caused an accident due to sudden and abrupt unneeded braking slowing the car unexpectedly nearly causing cars behind me to run into me. This vehicle behavior has occurred multiple times.

2018 Nissan Rogue – NHTSA ID No. 11185890 – Minnetonka, MN

The automatic emergency brake system engages when there is a clear road and no obstructions in front of or around the vehicle whatsoever. The most recent incident happened while the car was in motion on a highway going 45-50 mph – the AEB system deployed and the car fully engaged the brakes in an attempt to stop. This was on an open road with no other vehicles or obstructions in the road or even in my direct line of sight. there are many others who seem to have reported this issue to their dealer’s service dept. and have been told there is nothing wrong with the sensors. I live where ice is common – had this happened even traveling at a slower pace in bad road conditions, I could have spun out, slid into other traffic, into the ditch, etc. this is an extremely dangerous situation…it’s a rear-end collision or even worse accident just waiting to happen.

2018 Nissan Rogue – NHTSA ID No. 11123321 – Manassas, VA

Forward emergency braking system engages while approaching a metal roadway surface and comes to a complete and abrupt stop. The roadway is a driveway on a private property. This vehicle is equipped with a safety system designed to prevent collisions with objects ahead, but engages when there is no object in front. The dealership has been aware of this issue since July 5, 2018 and the manufacturer has been aware since July 26, 2018. In several instances, motorist traveling behind were unexpectedly surprised and forced to take evasive maneuvers to avoid collision.

Petitions of this type to NHTSA require a formal response within 120 days. In the meantime, the Center will continue to work to inform the public of the risk these vehicles present and the need for Nissan to recall and repair affected Rogues as quickly as possible.

Read the Center’s petition to NHTSA to investigate the above listed vehicles here

##

Over the last 49 years, the Center for Auto Safety has successfully led the fight for lemon laws in every state, airbags in every vehicle, and recall repairs being made at no cost to the consumer. The Center is a membership-driven organization headquartered in Washington, DC and is also home to the Safe Climate Campaign which fights global warming by working for big, specific measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Center publishes TheCarBook.com, which has for the last 39 years been America’s most comprehensive car buying guide and now offers, exclusively for members, the monthly Safety TuneUp Report, for regular alerts on safety issues relating to their cars. To learn more about the Center, please visit www.AutoSafety.org.