. It was 7am when my phone rang. Instead of an alarm, it was my recruiter disturbing me from a pleasant dream. It was too early for a phone call or to be caught off guard, so I did not answer. I went to take a shower and get ready for the day. On my way to work, I listened to the voice mail she had left.

"Oh my God, are you OK!"

In the company's directory, there are several people that shared the same first and last name as me. I was OK. So she must have dialed the wrong phone number. I assumed somewhere, an employee named Ibrahim Diallo, was in trouble. But not me.

At work, when I scanned my key card at the turnstile, it flashed red, made a grumpy beep, and refused to disengage. I tried it a few more times, it kept flashing red and grumping. I threw a glance at Jose and made sure to make eye contact. He shrugged. A moment later he laughed then pressed a button under his desk and the turnstile turned open. Jose was one of the security guards in the LA-1 skyscraper I worked in.

I immediately called the recruiter back and it went something like this:

Recruiter: Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday?

Me: Yes I did.

R: Is everything OK?

M: Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem?

R: I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building?

M: I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening?

R: I think there is a confusion. I'll ask my manager then I will call you back.

Jose has seen me come to work everyday through those doors for more than half a year. I believe this was his idea of a joke. He must have disabled the turnstile right before I was to scan my key card. I went straight to my manager to see "If everything was OK."

Me: Hi!

Sam (manager): Hi Ibrahim, how are you?

Me: I'm fine. I received a call from my recruiter. Did you want to talk to me?

Sam: No, I don't think so. Did she tell you what the problem was?

Me: No. She said she will call me back. I'll wait for her call, I guess.

I did not receive a call from her. Nothing interesting happened on that day, just good Ol' work routine.

The next day I drove my car to the parking structure and heard the same grumpy beep when I scanned my card. There was a long line of cars forming behind me, the drivers were getting impatient and some had started to honk at me already. It's a long one way corridor where getting out of the lane was not an option. I silently panicked. A security guard appeared, gave me a look, shook his head disappointed, then used his own card to let me in. I embarrassingly drove all the way to the 8th floor.

Inside the building, my card failed again, and the loud grumpy beep made sure everyone was aware of it. Jose let me in once more.

It wasn't the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it. As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away. In the meanwhile, every morning the security guard would have to print a temporary badge for me that would expire by 7pm. Small price to pay.

I went to my desk and worked for a few hours on hardware. When I was done, I logged into my Windows machine to mark my Jira ticket as completed, that's when I noticed that I had been logged out of Jira. I tried my jira credentials multiple times and they did not work.

On my floor, there was a poster at the very entrance. An employee made a New Yorker style comic with two employees talking from across their cubicles. These were the words:

Is JIRA down?

Yes, JIRA is down!

Jira is always down. So I asked my coworker in the next cubicle if JIRA was working for him. He answered Yes. Then I asked him to look for my ticket number. He opened it. Right next to my name on this ticket, it had the word (Inactive) and my name was grayed out.

That's something the manager could sort out, but it was lunch time. I went down to the cafeteria and ordered a nice black bean burger, a healthy diet is important if your work consists off sitting down all day. I went for my usual after-lunch one mile walk, again this counters sitting down all day.

Of course, when I come back, I take the stairs up to the 11th floor. Very hard, but you know, sitting down all day is not good. The only problem was that I forgot that when I reached the 11th floor, I would have to scan my key card to leave the stairs. That card reader reminded me with the slowest, meanest, and grumpiest beep an 8 bit machine could make. I was stuck on the stairs. I sat there for 10 minutes until a fellow stair taker opened the door for me. I sneaked into the floor like a common thief.

That's when my recruiter called me in panic apologizing again and asking if everything was OK. She told me she had received an email saying I was terminated. I told my manager right away, and she was surprised because she received no such information. She couldn't understand why my JIRA was disabled but the system wouldn't allow her to enable my account. She created a JIRA ticket for the support team to re-enable my account.

Back at my desk, there was a big scary (and threatening) error message on my screen. It asked me to restart my computer immediately. I did not comply. Well, I had a few hundred windows open and multiple programming environments running. I just dismissed the box. I knew that if I restarted that computer, I wouldn't be able to log back in.

Instead, I logged into Confluence to document my work for the rest of the day.

The next day, I took Uber to work, I didn't want to deal with the parking again. Jose couldn't print a temporary badge for me because my name appeared in RED and flagged in the system. My manager had to come down to escort me into the building. The recruiter sent me a message telling me not to go to work. She had just received a message that my badge had been used while I had been terminated. I was already in the building. We got the Director involved.

What the Hell is happening? Am I fired or not.

The director laughed. She was a tall elegant woman with the confidence of a countess. She stretched her arm, unhooked the phone and dialed the number for support with the one same hand. With her might and title, she ordered them to immediately restore everything back to normal and hung up. She assured me that everything will be alright, to get back to work and this would be solved by the end of the day. I was still there in her office and saw her face when she got this email:

I was successfully terminated. Case closed.

In the meanwhile, there was an emergency on the multimillion dollar tool I was working on. Hundred of thousands of records were missing and the web interface was not responding. I went to my desk only to see that my Windows machine had been automatically restarted (Damn you Microsoft) and my account had been disabled.

Thank God I had my CentOS machine. The regular tools I use for development were no longer accessible. I had to hack my way into the server to restart it, debug it, reactivate all the services, and reprocess the data.

Before I left the building I went to see the director that was still on the phone with support. She gave me the green light to come to work the next day.

The next day, I had been locked out off every single system except my Linux machine. Even the service we used to log our hours to get paid had been deactivated. I spent the first half of the day documenting my work.

After lunch, two people appeared at my desk. One was a familiar long face that seemed to avoid making direct eye contact. It was Jose and his fellow security guard. He cordially informed me that he was to escort me out of the building.

The director was furious. They had received a very threatening email to escort me out of the building and were just doing their job.

"Who the hell is sending those emails!?"

I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.

Over the next 3 weeks, I was CCed on the emails about my case. I watched it be escalated to bigger and more powerful titles over and over, yet no one could do anything about it. From time to time, they would attach a system email. It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. Disable this, disable that, revoke access here, revoke access there, escort out of premises, etc.

The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim.

I had worked there for more than 8 months and my work spoke for itself. I was receiving constant praises, people were fascinated by my work. I was getting along super well with every one. I like to believe that I never did anything wrong to anyone... This was a great reminder of the frailty of job security.

Eventually the problem was solved. My recruiter called me one morning and told me that I can come back to work. I had missed 3 weeks of work by that time, and pay. Once on site, I got an explanation.

Once the order for employee termination is put in, the system takes over. All the necessary orders are sent automatically and each order completion triggers another order. For example, when the order for disabling my key card is sent, there is no way of it to be re-enabled. Once it is disabled, an email is sent to security about recently dismissed employees. Scanning the key card is a red flag. The order to disable my Windows account is also sent. There is also one for my JIRA account. And on and on. There is no way to stop the multi-day long process. I had to be rehired as a new employee. Meaning I had to fill up paperwork, set up direct deposit, wait for Fedex to ship a new key card.

But at the end of the day the question is still, why was I terminated in the first place?

I was on a 3 years contract and had only worked for 8 months. Just before I was hired, this company was acquired by a much larger company and I joined during the transition. My manager at the time was from the previous administration. One morning I came to work to see that his desk had been wiped clean, as if he was disappeared. As a full time employee, he had been laid off. He was to work from home as a contractor for the duration of a transition. I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that. Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system.

I was very comfortable at the job. I had learned the in-and-out of all the systems I worked on. I had made friends at work. I had created a routine around the job. I became the go-to guy. I was comfortable.

When my contract expired, the machine took over and fired me.

A simple automation mistake(feature) caused everything to collapse. I was escorted out of the building like a thief, I had to explain to people why I am not at work, my coworkers became distant (except my manager who was exceptionally supportive). Despite the great opportunity it was for me to work at such a big company, I decided to take the next opportunity that presented itself.

What I called job security was only an illusion. I couldn't help but imagine what would have happened if I had actually made a mistake in this company. Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake. I missed 3 weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine.

At least a year later, I can sit here and write about it without feeling too embarrassed. So that's the story about the machine that fired me and no human could do anything about it.

PS: I am willing to bet the recent issue with YouTube Piracy filter blocking MIT courses and the Blender Foundation are the result of The Machine being the ultimate decider. Even though YouTube's support team clearly knows that these don't violate terms and conditions, the Machine decided otherwise. And they will have to fight it to death to bring the videos back online.. . A California software developer has published a viral blog post recounting his experience of being fired by a machine – and how his bosses were powerless to stop it.

Ibrahim Diallo had been working at a Los Angeles company for just eight months of his three-year contract when his key card stopped working – and he had to rely on the security guard to allow him entry.

“It wasn’t the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it,” Diallo wrote in his blog post. “As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away.”

Egyptian-born Diallo then noticed that he had been logged out of his work system and that the word ‘inactive’ was listed alongside his name.

That same day, he was told by his recruiter that she had received an automated email from the work system to say his contract had been terminated.

However, he was reassured by his director that the problem would be resolved and he was given the green light to come into work the following day.

The next day he had been locked out of almost every single system. Later that afternoon, two security guards escorted him out of the building after they’d received a “very threatening email” ordering them to do so.

He wrote: “I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.

“The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim.”

The problem was eventually resolved after three weeks and Diallo found out why he was terminated in the first place.

Just before he was hired on a three-year contract, the company was acquired by a larger organisation and he joined during this transition.

His previous manager had been laid off as a full-time employee and was told to work from home as a contractor for the duration of his contract.

“I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that,” Diallo wrote. “Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system.

“When my contract expired, the machine took over and fired me.”

According to the software developer, he missed three weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine. Although he was back at work, he eventually decided to take a new job.

“Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake,” he said.. 'The Machine Fired Me' -- a blog post by Ibrahim Diallo speaks of exactly what it is titled. Diallo was literally fired by a machine one fine day. He realised it after his security pass stopped working, his computer system login was disabled, and finally he was hustled from the building by security personnel. He hopes that his detailed story in his blog will serve as a warning to firms about relying too much on automation.

Diallo's firing

advertisement

After having to enter his office with the help of his security guard, failing to log in to his computer, and a long wait, he was told by his recruiter that she had received an email saying his contract was terminated.

She promised to sort out the problem.

As Diallo entered his Los Angeles office the next day, he'd been locked out of every single system "except my Linux machine" and then, after lunch, two people appeared at his desk to inform him that an email had been received telling them to escort him from the building.

Diallo's manager couldn't do anything about it

Ibrahim's boss was confused but helpless.

I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it.

Adding to the uncontrollable situation, Diallo writes: "They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building".

"I watched it be escalated to bigger and more powerful titles over and over, yet no-one could do anything about it."

"From time-to-time, they would attach a system email," he laments.

System-generated e-mail sent to Ibrahim instructing his termination. (Courtesy: Ibrahim Diallo's blog)

At the time that he was fired, he was eight months into a three-year contract and over the next three weeks he was copied into emails about his case.

"It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. Disable this, disable that, revoke access here, revoke access there, escort out of premises, etc," writes Ibrahim on the ruthlessness of the system.

The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim

Why did the machine fire him after all?

A three weeks' time is what it took Ibrahim's bosses to really figure why he had been fired.

His firm was going through changes, both in terms of the systems it used and the people it employed.

His original manager had been recently laid off and sent to work from home for the rest of his time at the firm and in that period he had not renewed Diallo's contract in the new system.

advertisement

This is the point when the machines took over -- dismissing him as an ex-employee.

"All the necessary orders are sent automatically and each order completion triggers another order. For example, when the order for disabling my key card is sent, there is no way of it to be re-enabled."

Further explaining the nature of the structure, he adds that "once it is disabled, an email is sent to security about recently dismissed employees. Scanning the key card is a red flag. The order to disable my Windows account is also sent. There is also one for my Jira account. And on and on".

"It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate," lamented Diallo about the machine's ruthlessness.

Diallo's final goodbye

Even though Diallo was allowed to get back to work, he had missed out on three weeks' worth of pay and been escorted from the building "like a thief".

He also had to explain his disappearance to others and found that his co-workers had become distant, so he decided to move to another job.

It's another example of a failure of human thinking where they allow it to be humans versus machines rather than humans plus machines - says Dallio

advertisement

Here's where he starts speaking about the role of Artificial Intelligence in mitigating the situation.

Here is how AI could have saved him

"One of the fundamental skills for all humans in an AI world is accountability -- just because the algorithm says it's the answer, it doesn't mean it actually is," explain Ibrahim.

The systems displayed no knowledge-based intelligence, meaning they didn't have a model designed to encapsulate knowledge (such as human resources expertise) in the form of rules, text and logical links.

At the same time, the systems showed no intelligence like the ability to learn from datasets such as recognising the factors that might lead to someone being fired.

As phys.org puts it, Ibrahim was fired as a result of an old-fashioned and poorly designed system triggered by a human error.

A more practical AI system could use a mix of techniques to make it smarter.

For instance, an AI system could've learned the rules to be applied to the nuances of real situations from the company's HR records.

To be more specific, an AI concept called "fuzzy logic" can interpret situations that aren't only black and white, applying evidence and conclusions in varying degrees to avoid the kind of stark decision-making that led to Diallo's dismissal.

What about you? Would you still prefer a human manager, as you find human contact essential, no matter how convincing the AI chatbot might be? Tell us in the comments section below.

advertisement

Read: India's Artificial Intelligence scene is set to explode, thanks to this Google-Niti Aayog tie-up. A tech worker in the US lost his job due to the company's automated systems removing him from the rolls eight months into a three-year contract because his manager did not update his contract terms.

It appears to be one of the first cases of a worker being unable to go to work because of the use of artificial intelligence to manage processes such as hiring and firing.

Ibrahim Diallo, a software developer with a company in Los Angeles, said the first inkling he had that there was trouble ahead came when he received a phone call from his recruiter - the woman who had found him the job - at 7am sometime in March last year.

Her voice message was simple: "Oh my God, are you OK!" He thought he had been mistaken for someone else with the same first name.

When he reached work — no mention was made of the company he worked for apart from the fact that it was in the LA-1 skyscraper — his keycard did not work, so he asked the guard to let him in.

He then called his recruiter and had the following conversation:

Recruiter: Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday?

Did you have a talk with your manager yesterday? Diallo: Yes I did.

Yes I did. R: Is everything OK?

Is everything OK? D: Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem?

Yes, everything is OK. Is there a problem? R: I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building?

I'm not sure, I received an email about you this morning... I guess it must have been a mistake. Did they let you in the building? D: I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening?

I don't understand. Yes, they let me in the building. What is happening? R: I think there is a confusion. I'll ask my manager then I will call you back.

Diallo, a native of Guinea who has lived in Egypt for a while before settling in the US, spoke to his manager but did not receive any indication that anything was wrong.

The next day, his card did not work at the parking gate and he had to be let in by the security guard. Once inside, he found his card did not allow him access to the office.

The email sent by Diallo's director and the reply she received.

After working for some time on his Linux machine, he logged onto his Windows machine to mark a JIRA ticket as completed. But he had been logged out of JIRA and could not get back despite trying numerous times.

Since the system was working for others, Diallo asked a colleague to check his ticket number and noticed that the word "Inactive" was present next to the number.

After lunch, he walked up 11 flights of stairs for the exercise but found that he could not get into the office. Soon after this, his recruiter called him and told him that she had received an email saying that he had been sacked.

Diallo asked his manager to enable his JIRA account but she found she could not and opened a ticket for the support team to attend to it.

The next day, 10 March 2017, he used Uber to get to work but found that the gate supervisor could not print a temporary pass for him as his name was in RED and flagged in the system.

After getting into the building, Diallo contacted the director at the company. She asked the support supervisor about it by email and received a reply saying that Diallo had been terminated as of 1 March 2017.

The following day, he found himself locked out of every single system at his office, apart from his Linux machine. At lunch time, two security people appeared and said they had to escort him from the building, as they had received a threatening email asking them to do so.

Over the next three weeks, Diallo was copied in on the emails that went between his director and company higher-ups. Finally, he was told that the problem had been solved and called back to work. By then, he had been away for three weeks and not been paid.

The explanation he gave was this: "Just before I was hired, this company was acquired by a much larger company and I joined during the transition. My manager at the time was from the previous administration.

"One morning I came to work to see that his desk had been wiped clean, as if he was disappeared. As a full-time employee, he had been laid off. He was to work from home as a contractor for the duration of a transition. I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that. Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system."

And he added: "A simple automation mistake (feature) caused everything to collapse. I was escorted out of the building like a thief, I had to explain to people why I am not at work, my co-workers became distant (except my manager who was exceptionally supportive).

"Despite the great opportunity it was for me to work at such a big company, I decided to take the next opportunity that presented itself.". . A real AI could have saved this man from being fired by a computer

Artificial Intelligence (AI) are becoming more common in industries such as banks, insurance companies, wealth management firms, factories, ecommerce, retail firms, train stations, hotels and other service industries. While there is a constant fear of AI taking over human jobs in the future, in this particular case, an error made by a human cost an employee his job.

Ibrahim Diallo, a Californian software developer, was fired from his job by a machine, because his previous manager hadn’t renewed his contract on the new computer system that lead to various automated systems get into action and in the end, him being escorted from the office building by two security guards. What’s more ironic, that even his managers were powerless to stop it.

“I was fired,” Diallo who shared his story in a detailed blog post said. “There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.”

As an advisory tale about the dangers of automation, Diallo hopes that companies take it as a lesson to not be over-dependent on automation.

Look like i made hacknews top #1 today!!! Thoroughly enjoyed the comments The machine Fired me#TheMachineFiredMe Artcle: https://t.co/D89JrwjmMF Comments: https://t.co/5yYHvAuCuE pic.twitter.com/peOMk0RO8t — Ibrahim Diallo (@dialloibu) June 20, 2018

Diallo had been working for just eight months of his three-year-long contract with the company in Los Angeles when one day his keycard, which granted him entry to work, stopped working.

“It wasn’t the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it,” Diallo wrote in his blog post. “As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away.”

This was just the start of bizarre events that took place over a few subsequent days, with things like his entry card into office not working, systems not allowing him to log in, notifications like ‘access barred’ etc. In fact, even the word ‘inactive’ was mentioned alongside his name. Diallo had to be sent home for three weeks when it all came to a head when a security guard came to escort him out of the building. He had been fired: a series of automated emails notifying it, had gone out to multiple people, and managers could do nothing.

After many weeks it was figured out Diallo had joined at a time when his company had been bought over by another. His direct manager who was part of the previous organization had been laid off and was sent to work from home during a transitional period. His ex-boss basically stopped doing anything, which also included non-renewal of Diallo’s contract in the new system. Once the machines took over, it triggered the automated, irreversible, algorithmic termination process, which persistently discontinued all of Diallo’s company access. As a result, human intervention became fruitless, which finally resulted in Diallo’s termination. Although, Diallo was reinstated later, he chose to move on to another job.

The entire incident brought to light that the AI systems had no knowledge-based intelligence (such as human resources expertise in the form of rules, text and logical link) nor did it have computational intelligence (the ability to learn from datasets – such as identifying the factors that might lead to dismissal). At the end of it, it was an old-fashioned and poorly designed system that saw Diallo get fired due to human error, which was neither communicated nor explained. What also came to light was the lack of humanity shown and also the inflexibility and ineffectiveness of the AI.

In scenarios, where one has lost his or her job and livelihood, it requires sensitivity and understanding to handle the situation, which is only possible through human contact and not through an AI chatbot. In other words, any job that involves managing people, applying expertise and social interaction, human involvement in such areas will still be necessary, which can’t be matched by a machine.

Source: The Conversation. Automation can be a boon for a company, but it can also be a serious liability, as one Ibrahim Diallo could easily tell you after his ordeal of being unceremoniously and unstoppably canned by the system while managers and even the company director stood powerless. Diallo’s story started off looking like something had merely malfunctioned, but by the end of it, his file had to be thrown out entirely and he had to be brought in as a new employee, despite only being 8 months into a 3 year contract. While Diallo was eventually restored to his rightful status and continued working, the incident made him miss three weeks of work, a dangerous proposition in today’s economy.

Ibrahim Diallo was a contractor who joined up with a new contract for a company at just the wrong time. The company had been sold, and a hiring manager who was a full-time employee had been knocked down to contractor status and sent to work from home as a budget measure. As such, when it came time to confirm and renew the contract that Diallo happened to be on, the manager didn’t get around to it. The termination process for contractors in the company was automated, so the days-long, snowballing process began. First, Diallo’s card key was deactivated, then he could no longer park. At one point, he had to use his personal Linux setup to “hack” into the system and fix some critical errors, which of course sprung mostly from issues concerning the system deactivating his profile little by little. Eventually, the system sent an angry-sounding and official-looking email that put the director who praised Diallo’s shining work and the security guard he was good friends with in the awkward position of escorting him off the premises. It took him three weeks of touching base with his recruiter and watching his personal support ticket go up the ladder before he was able to return to work.

Advertisement

Advertisement

The moral of the story here is a common trope in the world of AI, from simple automated programs like this one all the way up to complex, humanlike AI and self-driving cars; there has to be some way for humans to intervene. In this case, the organization had to go three weeks with others picking up the slack, and Diallo had to go three weeks without a paycheck. Compared to the potential consequences of unsafe and unreliable AI, however, this could be considered light.. . . . The Machine That Hires Me Oct 2018

Have you ever read Ibrahim Diallo’s famous, scary, and funny blog post The Machine Fired Me? Ibrahim, working as a software developer, accidentally got fired. Thanks to a fully automated business process his key card, used for physical accessing the facilities, stopped working. Various accounts for all kinds of work-related systems got disabled and he did not receive pay for three weeks. The automation was so powerful, he had to be re-hired to get back into the system. There was no stopping the machinery.

I had (or am I still having?) a similar experience lately. Similar in that I am also in some kind of machinery and the process seems unstoppable. Different in that I am not being fired but I am being hired by a machine.

Earlier this year I was contacted by a recruiter from Facebook on LinkedIn. We started chatting and eventually, I agreed to apply for a Production Engineering role. I had a couple of phone interviews. Then I was invited to London for a day of on-site interviews. I was extended an offer, which I would eventually turn down. All that was a very pleasant experience and I admire Facebook for their professional recruiting process. I genuinely had a lot of fun solving the challenges and interacting with recruiting and engineering. It seems, however, that somewhere in this process the machines took over. While the recruiter and I agreed to end our journey at some point and to keep in touch, the machinery had different plans.

After turning down the offer I still had access to the digital contract signing interface for some days. Furthermore, the onboarding portal suggested I decide on my preferred hardware, including a laptop computer and phone. I received a parcel containing a printed guidebook for new Londoners and a Facebook-branded blanket. That blanket! It is so fluffy!

Then another message arrived reading “Congratulations on your new role with Facebook!” and informing me about my upcoming business travels. For the latter, I was asked to apply for a U.S. visa or the ESTA visa waiver program. Most of this happened within a couple of days. Out of curiosity, I peeked into the emails and websites I got sent, but I did not interact further with them. I informed my recruiter so that they know just in case any harm is done. But one does not simply ignore the machinery! A couple of days later the automation poked me again: “We are very excited for you to join the team. It looks like we’re still missing some of your information. Please navigate to the People Portal to complete your outstanding tasks right away.” Let me translate this: “Human! It’s me, the machinery. You are supposed to obey. Do so now.” Even before I could let my recruiter know about the latest developments, they proactively send me a message apologizing for the repeated interaction. While the machinery at Facebook seems unstoppable, the humans are great and caring there!

At this point, I thought this was over now. Essentially some mail triggers went off when they shouldn’t, not a big deal, right? I was wrong. A month later I received a mail from Altair Global, a relocation services provider. There was no reference to Facebook in the mail. So I mistakenly related it to a different opportunity and clicked the link in the mail. A few seconds later I had an account with Altair Global asking me to complete a bunch of tasks for my upcoming move to London. Wait, what? I am moving to London? Oh! This must be the machinery that won’t stop hiring me. And yes, looking at the dashboard page of my unwanted relocation I was able to spot the Facebook logo. 🧐

It was the machinery again! I contacted my assigned Altair relocation consultant and asked them to maybe check with their customer Facebook if this relocation is still something they want to pay for. The time is running out on some of the tasks. I am afraid the machinery will notice and poke me again for being a bad human. Forgive me, oh great automation overlord, for I am just flesh and blood! 🤖😰

Contrary to Ibrahim, who got an unsolicited lesson in job security, no harm was done in my case. Even better, I received gifts and got interesting insights into business process automation.

To be continued…?. Software developer Ibrahim Diallo was 'fired by a machine'. Photo / Supplied

Not content with taking our jobs, the machines have already started firing people.

A California software developer has revealed how he was sacked from his job by a "machine out for blood", and even his managers were powerless to stop it.

In a cautionary tale about the dangers of automation — and possibly of the future that awaits us all — Ibrahim Diallo recounted the bizarre sequence of events that started with an early-morning voicemail and ended in him being escorted from the building by two security guards.

"I was fired," the Egyptian-born programmer recalled in a viral blog post. "There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building."

Diallo had been working at the company for just eight months of his three-year contract when one day his key card stopped working. Earlier that morning, he had missed a phone call from his recruiter, who left him a strange message saying, "Oh my God, are you OK!"

"It wasn't the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it," Diallo said. "As soon as I got to my floor, I went to see my manager to let her know. She promised to order me a new one right away."

Over the next few days he continued to work, using a temporary badge or buzzed in by the security guard Jose, but Diallo was progressively locked out of his various computer accounts and unable to log back in.

Eventually his recruiter got back to him to say she had received an email saying he had been terminated.

"I told my manager right away, and she was surprised because she received no such information," he said.

"The next day, I took Uber to work, I didn't want to deal with the parking again. Jose couldn't print a temporary badge for me because my name appeared in RED and flagged in the system.

"My manager had to come down to escort me into the building. The recruiter sent me a message telling me not to go to work. She had just received a message that my badge had been used while I had been terminated. I was already in the building. We got the director involved.

"'What the hell is happening? Am I fired or not?'"

Diallo said his director laughed and said everything would be all right. She picked up the phone and ordered the support team to restore everything.

"She gave me the green light to come to work the next day," he said.

"The next day, I had been locked out of every single system except my Linux machine. After lunch, two people appeared at my desk. One was a familiar long face that seemed to avoid making direct eye contact. It was Jose and his fellow security guard. He cordially informed me that he was to escort me out of the building.

"The director was furious. They had received a very threatening email to escort me out of the building and were just doing their job. 'Who the hell is sending those emails!?'"

For the next three weeks, unable to come to work, Diallo was copied into emails about his case, escalated higher and higher up the food chain, "yet no one could do anything about it".

"From time to time, they would attach a system email," he said.

"It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. Disable this, disable that, revoke access here, revoke access there, escort out of premises, etc.

"The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim."

Finally after three weeks, he was able to come back to work. It turned out, his previous manager had been sacked during a transition period, and was ordered to serve out the remainder of his duties as a contractor from home.

"I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that," he said. "Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system."

The problem was, once the order for employee termination went through, "the system takes over".

"All the necessary orders are sent automatically and each order completion triggers another order," he said.

"For example, when the order for disabling my key card is sent, there is no way of it to be re-enabled. Once it is disabled, an email is sent to security about recently dismissed employees. Scanning the key card is a red flag.

"The order to disable my Windows account is also sent. There is also one for my Jira account. And on and on. There is no way to stop the multi-day long process. I had to be rehired as a new employee. Meaning I had to fill up paperwork, set up direct deposit, wait for FedEx to ship a new key card."

Diallo said things weren't the same with his co-workers after his absence, and he eventually moved on to the next opportunity.

"A simple automation mistake (feature) caused everything to collapse," he said.

"I missed three weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine."

The story went viral after being picked up by a number of tech websites, with readers describing it as like something from a dystopian future or an episode of Black Mirror.

"This reads like a techno-thriller and I want more," one commenter wrote.

"The first rule of automation should be, 'There must be a Big Red Button that, when pressed, aborts the entire sequence of events.' The second rule of automation should be, 'When aborted, prior to completion, the sequence must be able to roll back all actions taken.'". Sign up for the View from Westminster email for expert analysis straight to your inbox Get our free View from Westminster email SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice

Ibrahim Diallo was allegedly fired by a machine. Recent news reports relayed the escalating frustration he felt as his security pass stopped working, his computer system login was disabled, and finally he was frogmarched from the building by security personnel. His managers were unable to offer an explanation, and powerless to overrule the system.

Some might think this was a taste of things to come as artificial intelligence is given more power over our lives. Personally, I drew the opposite conclusion. Diallo was sacked because a previous manager hadn’t renewed his contract on the new computer system and various automated systems then clicked into action. The problems were not caused by AI, but by its absence.

The systems displayed no knowledge-based intelligence, meaning they didn’t have a model designed to encapsulate knowledge (such as human resources expertise) in the form of rules, text and logical links. Equally, the systems showed no computational intelligence – the ability to learn from datasets – such as recognising the factors that might lead to dismissal. In fact, it seems that Diallo was fired as a result of an old-fashioned and poorly designed system triggered by a human error. AI is certainly not to blame – and it may be the solution.

Google uses artificial intelligence algorithm to predict the likelihood of death of hospital patients

The conclusion I would draw from this experience is that some human resources functions are ripe for automation by AI, especially as, in this case, dumb automation has shown itself to be so inflexible and ineffective. Most large organisations will have a personnel handbook that can be coded up as an automated, expert system with explicit rules and models. Many companies have created such systems in a range of domains that involve specialist knowledge, not just in human resources.

But a more practical AI system could use a mix of techniques to make it smarter. The way the rules should be applied to the nuances of real situations might be learned from the company’s HR records, in the same way common law legal systems like England’s use precedents set by previous cases. The system could revise its reasoning as more evidence became available in any given case using what’s known as “Bayesian updating”. An AI concept called “fuzzy logic” could interpret situations that aren’t black and white, applying evidence and conclusions in varying degrees to avoid the kind of stark decision-making that led to Diallo’s dismissal.

The need for several approaches is sometimes overlooked in the current wave of overenthusiasm for “deep learning” algorithms, complex artificial neural networks inspired by the human brain that can recognise patterns in large datasets. As that is all they can do, some experts are now arguing for a more balanced approach. Deep learning algorithms are great at pattern recognition, but they certainly do not show deep understanding.

Using AI in this way would likely reduce errors and, when they did occur, the system could develop and share the lessons with corresponding AI in other companies so that similar mistakes are avoided in the future. That is something that can’t be said for human solutions. A good human manager will learn from his or her mistakes, but the next manager is likely to repeat the same errors.

So, what are the downsides? One of the most striking aspects of Diallo’s experience is the lack of humanity shown. A decision was made, albeit in error, but not communicated or explained. An AI may make fewer mistakes, but would it be any better at communicating its decisions? I think the answer is probably not.

Losing your job and livelihood is a stressful and emotional moment for anyone but the most frivolous employees. It is a moment when sensitivity and understanding are required. So, I for one would certainly find human contact essential, no matter how convincing the AI chatbot.

A sacked employee may feel that they have been wronged and may wish to challenge the decision through a tribunal. That situation raises the question of who was responsible for the original decision and who will defend it in law. Now is surely the moment to address the legal and ethical questions posed by the rise of AI, while it is still in its infancy.

Adrian Hopgood is a professor of intelligent systems and director of future and emerging technologies at the University of Portsmouth. This piece originally appeared on The Conversation. Ibrahim Diallo’s story is a cautionary tale about taking the ‘human’ out of human resources.

We’re often told not to fear automation. The robots are here to make our lives easier, not to run us out of a job. With their help, we are told, we will have more time to focus on the things that matter.

But perhaps our baser fears are warranted, especially when you find out you’ve been sacked, not from your manager but from a machine, as was the case for US-based software developer Ibrahim Diallo.

When you’re fired by a machine and the humans can do nothing

It was a regular work day for Ibrahim Diallo, he recalls in his now viral blog post. Arriving at work, he attempted to scan himself into the building with his ID card. It was denied. Annoying, but not a major concern. Thanks to a friendly security guard, he was buzzed through and went about his day.

The second issue occurred the following day, when his ID card failed to allow him access to the staff car park. Assuming it was some kind of malfunction, he ordered a new card.

As the day progressed, Diallo kept encountering new problems – he had been logged out of his computer and various programs. Then he got a call from his recruiter asking if he was okay, as she received an email saying that Diallo been terminated from his role.

This was the first he’d heard of it, and after speaking with his manager, he found out it was the first she’d heard of it too. It was passed off as a technical issue, and he was given the go ahead to come into work the next day. Diallo tried to go about business as usual the following day, but after lunch he was faced with two security guards standing at his desk who had received a “very threatening” email telling them to escort him out of the building.

Diallo says: “I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building”.

The system was “out for blood”

While the issue was being resolved, Diallo was cc’d in on various emails and watched his case escalating higher and higher up the organisational food chain.

“From time to time, they would attach a system email. It was soulless and written in red as it gave orders that dictated my fate. The system was out for blood and I was its very first victim,” he says.

The root cause of the issue was eventually discovered. It turns out this system error had a human beginning. Diallo’s previous manager had been laid off and was working out his notice period from home. Diallo suggests that perhaps his former manager had neglected certain responsibilities following his shock termination, responsibilities such as renewing Diallo’s contract.

Diallo explains that once the order for termination is put in, the system “takes over”. Eventually, things were sorted out and Diallo was able to return to work, following three weeks of unpaid leave. But things weren’t the same. After being escorted from the building “like a thief”, Diallo faced many uncomfortable conversations with colleagues, having to explain his sudden disappearance and subsequent return. They became distant, except for his manager who was “exceptionally supportive”. Despite having previously enjoyed his role, Diallo decided to leave the company in pursuit of new opportunities.

Is there room for automation in HR?

If it’s this easy to accidentally sack an employee you have to ask, can we rely on automation to undertake certain HR functions without human oversight? While automation can be an effective tool for, say, recruitment, perhaps we shouldn’t be relying on it for HR tasks that require a more delicate approach.

Diallo agrees: “Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake. I missed three weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine.”

Photo by Andrew E Weber.. "It wasn't the first time my key card failed, I assumed it was time to replace it." So began a sequence of events that saw Ibrahim Diallo fired from his job , not by his manager but by a machine. From a report:And that was just the beginning. Mr Diallo soon realized that he was logged out of his work system and "inactive" status was appearing next to his name, his colleagues told him. He was then informed by his recruiter, who was just as puzzled, that his contract has been terminated. Next day, says Mr Diallo, he was locked out of every system, except his Linux machine. Things continued to go south, as two people approached Mr Diallo to escort him out of the building. The story continues:. As of August 26th, 2021 Yahoo India will no longer be publishing content. Your Yahoo Account, Mail and Search experiences will not be affected in any way and will operate as usual. We thank you for your support and readership.. It was only a matter of time before the machines started fighting back. And let's be honest, we all knew the software engineers would be the first to fall.

And so it was that Ibrahim Diallo, in California, USA, found himself fired from his job, had his network access and his entry card killed, and was unable to get himself reinstated despite his own manager, and even his manager's boss, assuring him that he was still employed.

That's right, in some demented but less apocalyptic version of War Games, our plucky engineer was fired by an automated system and the humans were unable to do anything about it.

Incredibly, it took three weeks for the issue to be resolved and for the not-fired Diallo to get back at his desk. Funnily enough, he decided at that point to quit, and take his expertise elsewhere. What the hell happened?

Well, according to Diallo, in a blog post he put up this week, no one knew. All he knew was that one day his key card stopped working, leading to a series of embarrassing appeals to the security guy and a series of temporary passes.

We've all been there. Except then he started getting calls from his recruiter asking why he'd been fired. He went to his manager who assured him he was still in a job – just eight months into his three-year contract – but slowly he was shut out of all the systems he needed to work on.

The manager kept insisting he come in until one day – prompted by a stern email – security turned up and escorted him from the building.

"Who the hell is sending those emails!?" he bellowed as HAL 9000 looked on without emotion. For it was HAL – or, at least his version of it – that was behind the situation, it was eventually discovered. But it was weeks of no work before that came out.

Transition

"Just before I was hired, this company was acquired by a much larger company and I joined during the transition," Diallo explained. "My manager at the time was from the previous administration.

"One morning I came to work to see that his desk had been wiped clean, as if he was disappeared. As a full time employee, he had been laid off. He was to work from home as a contractor for the duration of a transition. I imagine due to the shock and frustration, he decided not to do much work after that. Some of that work included renewing my contract in the new system."

Robot Romeo gets its 'antenna' snapped off in attempt to 'charm' testy American READ MORE

As it turned out, some time-saving sysadmin had written a script to automatically shut out an employee with the trigger being the official employee termination email.

The automation extended to the point that the non-renewal of the contract – requiring human intervention – led to the termination email, which led to that employee's key card being disabled, and their network access cut off on each system that they had privileges on.

What about the email ordering security to escort him from the building? That was seemingly triggered by him trying to use his cancelled key card to get into the building. Another script red-flagged the attempted unauthorized entry and alerted security. When he then tried to log in to his blocked accounts, well…

The system was also impervious to efforts to stop the process, no matter how high up the issue went. In the end, the company gave up and Diallo had to be rehired as a completely new employee, with all his details re-entered – including bank details - and his network privileges recreated from scratch. A new key card had to be ordered.

"What I called job security was only an illusion," he writes nervously. "I couldn't help but imagine what would have happened if I had actually made a mistake in this company. Automation can be an asset to a company, but there needs to be a way for humans to take over if the machine makes a mistake. I missed three weeks of pay because no one could stop the machine."

Oh we know

Of course what he doesn't know but we suggest is that this was no machine at work – at least not one working autonomously.

Somewhere out there is a Bastard Operator from Hell who knows exactly what happened. We imagine he is currently reclining on a Caribbean beach, checking every once in a while that everything is up and that the system continues to be prompted to make it look as though he is entering the building at night and leaving again in the morning.

No one sees him and they dare not ask him questions. No one has opened his door in years and that's how he likes it. We take out hat off to you, sir. ®. Ibrahim Diallo was eight months into a three year contract with a big company when its systems abruptly decided that he was fired: first it told his recruiter that he'd been let go, then it stopped accepting his pass for the parking and the turnstyles, then his logins stopped working, and at each turn, his supervisor, and that person's boss, and the HR people, were at a loss to explain or reverse the steady, automated disappearance of Ibrahim from the company.



Eventually, they had to send him home for three weeks while the top bosses exchanged volley after volley of email with the mystified IT staff until they got to the bottom of things: Ibrahim's direct manager had been laid off and sent to work from home during a transitional period. His ex-boss basically stopped doing anything, including ticking the box that said that Ibrahim's contract was still in force, and this missed step triggered the automated, irreversible, algorithmic termination process, which relentlessly discontinued all of Ibrahim's company access — a fully automated process that ensured that ex-employees weren't accidentally left with ongoing access to sensitive systems and data.





The explanation is anodyne, but the process was absolutely chilling, something like "Remember Me", the Star Trek:TNG episode where the whole world disappears one drib at a time, leaving Dr Crusher in a kind of astro-Satrean wasteland (it's also got more than a passing similarity to Harlan Ellison's story Shatterday).

The next day, I had been locked out off every single system except my Linux machine. Even the service we used to log our hours to get paid had been deactivated. I spent the first half of the day documenting my work. After lunch, two people appeared at my desk. One was a familiar long face that seemed to avoid making direct eye contact. It was Jose and his fellow security guard. He cordially informed me that he was to escort me out of the building. The director was furious. They had received a very threatening email to escort me out of the building and were just doing their job. "Who the hell is sending those emails!?" I was fired. There was nothing my manager could do about it. There was nothing the director could do about it. They stood powerless as I packed my stuff and left the building.

The Machine Fired Me [Ibrahim Diallo/Idiallo]





(via Four Short Links)