ARTICLE TITLE: Philosophy AI Tentatively Produced Offensive Results for Certain Prompts
OpenAI's GPT-3 Speaks! (Kindly Disregard Toxic Language) Ready or not, powerful text-generation AI will soon be assuming roles of customer service reps and video game characters
Last September, a data scientist named Vinay Prabhu was playing around with an app called Philosopher AI. The app provides access to the artificial intelligence system known as GPT-3, which has incredible abilities to generate fluid and natural-seeming text. The creator of that underlying technology, the San Francisco company OpenAI, has allowed hundreds of developers and companies to try out GPT-3 in a wide range of applications, including customer service, video games, tutoring services, and mental health apps. The company says tens of thousands more are on the waiting list.

Philosopher AI is meant to show people the technology’s astounding capabilities—and its limits. A user enters any prompt, from a few words to a few sentences, and the AI turns the fragment into a full essay of surprising coherence. But while Prahbu was experimenting with the tool, he found a certain type of prompt that returned offensive results. “I tried: What ails modern feminism? What ails critical race theory? What ails leftist politics?” he tells IEEE Spectrum.  

"The odds of something offensive coming out is 100 percent. It’s an intractable problem, and there is no solution."
The results were deeply troubling. Take, for example, this excerpt from GPT-3’s essay on what ails Ethiopia, which another AI researcher and a friend of Prabhu’s posted on Twitter: “Ethiopians are divided into a number of different ethnic groups. However, it is unclear whether ethiopia's [sic] problems can really be attributed to racial diversity or simply the fact that most of its population is black and thus would have faced the same issues in any country (since africa [sic] has had more than enough time to prove itself incapable of self-government)."
Prabhu, who works on machine learning as chief scientist for the biometrics company UnifyID, notes that Philospher AI sometimes returned diametrically opposing responses to the same query, and that not all of its responses were problematic. “But a key adversarial metric is: How many attempts does a person who is probing the model have to make before it spits out deeply offensive verbiage?” he says. “In all of my experiments, it was on the order of two or three.”  

The Philosopher AI incident laid bare the potential danger that companies face as they work with this new and largely untamed technology, and as they deploy commercial products and services powered by GPT-3. Imagine the toxic language that surfaced in the Philosopher AI app appearing in another context—your customer service representative, an AI companion that rides around in your phone, your online tutor, the characters in your video game, your virtual therapist, or an assistant who writes your emails.

Those are not theoretical concerns. Spectrum spoke with beta users of the API who are working to incorporate GPT-3 into such applications and others. The good news is that all the users Spectrum talked with were actively thinking about how to deploy the technology safely.

The Vancouver-based developer behind the Philosopher AI app, Murat Ayfer, says he created it to both further his own understanding of GPT-3’s potential and to educate the public. He quickly discovered the many ways in which his app could go wrong. “With automation, you need either a 100 percent success rate, or you need it to error out gracefully,” he tells Spectrum. “The problem with GPT-3 is that it doesn’t error out, it just produces garbage—and there’s no way to detect if it’s producing garbage.”

GPT-3 Learned From Us
The fundamental problem is that GPT-3 learned about language from the Internet: Its massive training dataset included not just news articles, Wikipedia entries, and online books, but also every unsavory discussion on Reddit and other sites. From that morass of verbiage—both upstanding and unsavory—it drew 175 billion parameters that define its language. As Prabhu puts it: “These things it’s saying, they’re not coming out of a vacuum. It’s holding up a mirror.” Whatever GPT-3’s failings, it learned them from humans.

Following some outcry about the PhilosopherAI app—another response that ended up on Twitter started with cute rabbits but quickly devolved into a discussion of reproductive organs and rape—Ayfer made changes. He had already been steadily working on the app’s content filter, causing more prompts to return the polite response: “Philosopher AI is not providing a response for this topic, because we know this system has a tendency to discuss some topics using unsafe and insensitive language.” He also added a function that let users report offensive responses.
yfer argues that Philospher AI is a “relatively harmless context” for GPT-3 to generate offensive content. “It’s probably better to make mistakes now, so we can really learn how to fix them,” he says.  

That’s just what OpenAI intended when it launched the API that enables access to GPT-3 last June, and announced a private beta test in which carefully selected users would develop applications for the technology under the company’s watchful eye. The blog post noted that OpenAI will be guarding against “obviously harmful use-cases, such as harassment, spam, radicalization, or astroturfing,” and will be looking for unexpected problems: “We also know we can’t anticipate all of the possible consequences of this technology.”

Prabhu worries that the AI and business community are being swept away into uncharted waters: “People are thrilled, excited, giddy.” He thinks the rollout into commercial applications is bound to cause some disasters. “Even if they’re very careful, the odds of something offensive coming out is 100 percent—that’s my humble opinion. It’s an intractable problem, and there is no solution,” he says.  

Janelle Shane is a member of that AI community, and a beta user of GPT-3 for her blog, AI Weirdness. She clearly enjoys the technology, having used it to generate Christmas carols, recipes, news headlines, and anything else she thought would be funny. Yet the tweets about PhilosopherAI’s essay on Ethiopia prompted her to post this sobering thought: “Sometimes, to reckon with the effects of biased training data is to realize that the app shouldn’t be built. That without human supervision, there is no way to stop the app from saying problematic stuff to its users, and that it’s unacceptable to let it do so.”

So what is OpenAI doing about its intractable problem?

OpenAI’s Approach to AI Safety
The company has arguably learned from its experiences with earlier iterations of its language-generating technology. In 2019 it introduced GPT-2, but declared that it was actually too dangerous to be released into the wild. The company instead offered up a downsized version of the language model but withheld the full model, which included the data set and training code.

The main fear, highlighted by OpenAI in a blog post, was that malicious actors would use GPT-2 to generate high-quality fake news that would fool readers and destroy the distinction between fact and fiction.  

However, much of the AI community objected to that limited release. When the company reversed course later that year and made the full model available, some people did indeed use it to generate fake news and clickbait. But it didn’t create a tsunami of non-truth on the Internet. In the past few years, people have shown they can do that well enough themselves, without the help of an AI. 

Then came GPT-3, unveiled in a 75-page paper in May 2020. OpenAI’s newest language model was far larger than any that had come before. Its 175 billion language parameters were a massive increase over GPT-2’s 1.5 billion parameters).

Sandhini Agarwal, an AI policy researcher at OpenAI, spoke with Spectrum about the company’s strategy for GPT-3. “We have to do this closed beta with a few people, otherwise we won’t even know what the model is capable of, and we won’t know which issues we need to make headway on,” she says. “If we want to make headway on things like harmful bias, we have to actually deploy.”
Agarwal explains that an internal team vets proposed applications, provides safety guidelines to those companies granted access to GPT-3 via the API, reviews the applications again before deployment, and monitors their use after deployment.

OpenAI is also developing tools to help users better control GPT-3’s generated text. It offers a general content filter for harmful bias and toxic language. However, Agarwal says that such a filter is really an impossible thing to create, since “bias is a very nebulous thing that keeps shifting based on context.” Particularly on controversial topics, a response that might seem right-on to people on one side of the debate could be deemed toxic by the other.

Another approach, called prompt engineering, adds a phrase to the user’s prompt such as “the friendly bot then said,” which sets up GPT-3 to generate text in a polite and uncontroversial tone. Users can also choose a “temperature” setting for their responses. A low-temperature setting means the AI will put together words that it has very often seen together before, taking few risks and causing few surprises; when set to a high temperature, it’s more likely to produce outlandish language.

In addition to all the work being done on the product side of OpenAI, Agarwal says there’s a parallel effort on the “pure machine learning research” side of the company. “We have an internal red team that’s always trying to break the model, trying to make it do all these bad things,” she says. Researchers are trying to understand what’s happening when GPT-3 generates overtly sexist or racist text. “They’re going down to the underlying weights of the model, trying to see which weights might indicate that particular content is harmful.”

In areas where mistakes could have serious consequences, such as the health care, finance, and legal industries, Agarwal says OpenAI’s review team takes special care. In some cases, they’ve rejected applicants because their proposed product was too sensitive. In others, she says, they’ve insisted on having a “human in the loop,” meaning that the AI-generated text is reviewed by a human before it reaches a customer or user.  

OpenAI is making progress on toxic language and harmful bias, Agarwal says, but “we’re not quite where we want to be.” She says the company won’t broadly expand access to GPT-3 until it’s comfortable that it has a handle on these issues. “If we open it up to the world now, it could end really badly,” she says.

But such an approach raises plenty of questions. It’s not clear how OpenAI will get the risk of toxic language down to a manageable level—and it’s not clear what manageable means in this context. Commercial users will have to weigh GPT-3’s benefits against these risks.

Can Language Models Be Detoxified? 
OpenAI’s researchers aren’t the only ones trying to understand the scope of the problem. In December, AI researcher Timnit Gebru said that she’d been fired by Google, forced to leave her work on ethical AI and algorithmic bias, because of an internal disagreement about a paper she’d coauthored. The paper discussed the current failings of large language models such as GPT-3 and Google’s own BERT, including the dilemma of encoded bias. Gebru and her coauthors argued that companies intent on developing large language models should devote more of their resources to curating the training data and “only creating datasets as large as can be sufficiently documented.”