HEBRON, West Bank — The Israeli military has been conducting a broad surveillance effort in the occupied West Bank to monitor Palestinians by integrating facial recognition with a growing network of cameras and smartphones, according to descriptions of the program by recent Israeli soldiers.

The surveillance initiative, rolled out over the past two years, involves in part a smartphone technology called Blue Wolf that captures photos of Palestinians’ faces and matches them to a database of images so extensive that one former soldier described it as the army’s secret “Facebook for Palestinians.” The phone app flashes in different colors to alert soldiers if a person is to be detained, arrested or left alone.. The Israeli military has deployed an extensive facial recognition program to track Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank, according to a new report by The Washington Post.

Former Israeli soldiers told the Post about a smartphone technology called “Blue Wolf,” which takes photos of Palestinians and stores them in a large-scale database. Once an image is captured, Blue Wolf matches that picture to a person in its database, and as the Post describes, soldiers’ phones will then flash a specific color that signifies if that individual should be arrested, detained, or left undisturbed.

“People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that several times over”

The Post notes that the Israeli army has been filling up the database with thousands of images of Palestinians over the past two years, and it even held “competitions” that rewarded soldiers for taking the most photos of people. The database is essentially a “Facebook for Palestinians,” a former soldier told the Post.

The Israeli military has also set up cameras throughout the city of Hebron that scan Palestinians’ faces and identify them for soldiers at checkpoints. Meanwhile, a series of CCTV cameras, some of which point into people’s homes, provide live monitoring 24/7.

According to the Post, the former soldiers were told by the military that the surveillance system was put in place to prevent terrorism. Either way, Israel’s system takes facial recognition to a dystopian extreme.

The largest city in the West Bank, Hebron has seen bitter and long-standing conflict between Israeli and Palestinian populations. A large portion of the city is administered directly by the Israeli military, which enforces curfews and other movement restrictions on the local population. But even in the context of the extreme security measures, the former soldiers who spoke to the Post found the facial recognition system alarming.

“I wouldn’t feel comfortable if they used it in the mall in [my hometown], let’s put it that way,” a former soldier told the Post. “People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that several times over.”. Cameras have long been an essential tool for Israel to monitor and watch Palestinians.

But these days, technology has advanced, with sophisticated facial recognition technology now used to screen Palestinians at military checkpoints.

But it's not just at checkpoints, according to a report in the Washington Post on Monday, which described a whole new level of surveillance in place across the West Bank called Blue Wolf.

Middle East Eye takes a look at this technology and what makes it different - more dystopian and more terrifying - when compared to what the Israeli military was already known to have in place.

What is Blue Wolf?

Stay informed with MEE's newsletters Sign up to get the latest alerts, insights and analysis, starting with Turkey Unpacked

According to the Washington Post's report which was based on the accounts of six former Israeli soldiers, Blue Wolf is a smartphone technology that captures images of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and then matches them with a database run by the Israeli military and intelligence.

Over the past two years, Israeli soldiers photographed Palestinians, including women, the elderly, and children - sometimes against their will - using Blue Wolf, with the number of photos taken reportedly running into the thousands.

To encourage uptake among soldiers, prizes were said to have been offered for the units that gathered the greatest number of photos of Palestinians to add to the database described by a former soldier as the army's "Facebook for Palestinians".

How does it work?

The Blue Wolf is believed to be part of a broader surveillance policy, initiated by the Israeli army in 2016, which deployed facial recognition technology, sensors, and cameras to monitor Palestinians in the occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank.

What appears to be new is that, instead of taking photos from stationary cameras, Blue Wolf gives Israeli soldiers the ability to capture images from smartphones and then use an app to search a database.

The app then has a colour-coded system that indicates whether the person photographed should be arrested or allowed to pass, the soldiers told the Washington Post.

Where was Blue Wolf used?

Hebron, a city in the southern occupied West Bank, was reported to be the target of a mass, round-the-clock Israeli surveillance operation.

Hebron is divided into two areas, H1 under the complete administrative and security control of the Palestinian Authority (PA), and H2, administratively run by the PA but controlled by the Israeli military, which has the final say on who enters and who exits the area.

Some 40,000 Palestinians live in H2, adjacent to 800 Israeli settlers, monitored by 18 permanently staffed Israeli military checkpoints.

According to the Washington Post, along with soldiers collecting photos using Blue Wolf, surveillance cameras have been mounted every 300 feet in this area with some installed on the roofs of private houses, leaving residents feeling they are - and perhaps actually are - being watched relentlessly.

A former Israeli soldier who was involved in what is called the "Hebron Smart City" project told the Washington Post that the system in Hebron is "a total violation of privacy of an entire people".

What about White Wolf?

In addition to Blue Wolf, there is also White Wolf, a system reportedly set up in 2016 and used by Jewish settlers in the West Bank.

This technology allows a user to scan a Palestinian's identification card and check it against a database accessed by the Israeli army, Israeli intelligence, and settlement security departments.

This might be done, for example, before a Palestinian is allowed to enter a settlement to do construction work.

Israel has said that White Wolf is used to thwart any Palestinian violent attacks against settlers or army forces.

Where else are Palestinian surveilled?

The city of Hebron is not the only Palestinian area heavily watched by the Israeli forces and police. The old city of Jerusalem is another.

Though there are no confirmed reports that the Blue Wolf was used in Jerusalem, the ancient streets and alleys of Holy City are crowded with Israeli cameras.

According to the Who Profits? report published in 2018, Israel had installed almost 400 cameras in Jerusalem, which are connected to the internet and can turn 360 degrees.

At that time, there was an Israeli camera for every 100 people in Jerusalem, which has a population of 36,000 living in a one-kilometre square.

The surveillance system in Jerusalem was introduced at the start of the Second Intifada, part of a plan called Mabat 2000 - mabat meaning "gaze" in Hebrew - and also an acronym for technological and surveillance centre.

Mabat 2000 was put into action by the Israeli police, intelligence, and private companies, the report said.

It has a direct line of communication to 800 police officers and it could see 95 percent of the city as of 2018.

This article is available in French on Middle East Eye French edition.. Earlier this month, based on testimony given by former soldiers to the anti-occupation veteran group Breaking the Silence, the Washington Post revealed the existence of Blue Wolf – the latest facial recognition technology used in the system of monitoring, surveillance and control of the Palestinian population in the occupied territories.. By Palestine Chronicle Staff

The Israeli army is using a massive facial recognition program in the occupied West Bank city of Hebron (Al-Khalil), a Washington Post report revealed on Monday.

According to the Washington Post, the Israeli military has been using a facial recognition smartphone technology called Blue Wolf for the past two years, through which Israeli soldiers take photos of Palestinians’ faces and match them to a database.

BREAKING: @washingtonpost investigation reveals IDF rollout of "Blue Wolf" — highly invasive surveillance technology to record the personal data and keep track of Palestinians living in the West Bank.

This invasion of privacy is on a whole new level.https://t.co/Z3wCZIBHGr — Breaking the Silence (@BtSIsrael) November 8, 2021

According to the Post, the database contains thousands of photos and the Israeli army has installed face-scanning cameras at Israeli military checkpoints as well. Using this system, Israeli soldiers identify Palestinians before they even present their ID cards and, on the basis of prior information about them, they detain them when the app sends an alert.

A recently discharged Israeli soldier told the Post: “I wouldn’t feel comfortable if they used it in the mall in (my hometown), let’s put it that way,” adding: “People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that, several times over.”

Israeli occupation forces harassed and blocked Palestinian children and their teachers from accessing their school in occupied Hebron, yesterday. pic.twitter.com/r3oyP6L26I — CJ Werleman (@cjwerleman) November 4, 2021

“In the past, Israel used basic technologies to identify Palestinians who take part in protests and mobilize the people in various popular activities. TV news footage or newspaper photos were thoroughly deciphered,” Palestinian journalist and editor of The Palestine Chronicle Ramzy Baroud wrote in a recent article, adding, “That old technique was eventually replaced by more advanced technology”.

“Thousands of Palestinians were detained and hundreds were assassinated in recent years as a result of drones data, analyzed through Israel’s burgeoning facial recognition software,” Baroud concluded.

(The Palestine Chronicle). For free real time breaking news alerts sent straight to your inbox sign up to our breaking news emails Sign up to our free breaking news emails Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the

Breaking News email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

Israel’s military is utilising facial recognition software to monitor Palestinians in the West Bank.

The sweeping surveillance effort utilises a smartphone technology called Blue Wolf and has been in operation for the past two years, as reported by The Washington Post.

A former Israeli soldier told the newspaper the technology was like a “Facebook for Palestinians”, as it was able to capture photos of Palestinians and match them with a database.

The photos to build the database for Blue Wolf were taken by the Israeli army of Palestinians of varying ages. It is unclear how many photos have been taken for the surveillance programme, but it is understood to be thousands.

Soldiers are then able to use an app that will flash different colours to ascertain if a Palestinian is to be arrested, detained or left alone.

In addition to the Blue Wolf technology, the Israeli army has installed facial-scanning equipment at the city of Hebron to assist soldiers with identification of Palestinians.

A former Israeli solider who served in an intelligence unit told the Post: “I wouldn’t feel comfortable if they used it in the mall in [my hometown], let’s put it that way.

“People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that several times over.”

A number of US cities such as San Francisco and Boston have banned facial recognition software and early last month the European Parliament voted for a ban on facial recognition in all public places.

Roni Pelli, a lawyer with the Association for Civil Rights in Israel, said: “While developed countries around the world impose restrictions on photography, facial recognition and surveillance, the situation described [in Hebron] constitutes a severe violation of basic rights, such as the right to privacy, as soldiers are incentivized to collect as many photos of Palestinian men, women, and children as possible in a sort of competition.”

When asked about surveillance operations the Israel Defence Force (IDF) told the Post cannot they “cannot comment on the IDF’s operational capabilities in this context”.. Israel’s new facial recognition surveillance system, one that is being used in every corner of the West Bank, is an alarming concern. Israel has devised a surveillance system called the Wolf Pack; a desktop system and a smartphone application that contain personal information of every Palestinian in the West Bank. For a long time, Israel has been collecting this large database with details on every Palestinian citizen, and as of now, is being used in full effect, with Israeli soldiers also expressing concern over it.

Via Bangkokpost.

Blue Wolf

The Israeli military developed this facial recognition program to track people in the West Bank, claiming it serves as a way to “prevent terrorism.” The new system has smartphone technology called Blue Wolf, a facial recognition program that takes pictures of people in the streets, or, to be concise, Palestinians. The pictures are then cross-referenced with the database by the Blue Wolf system and identifies the individual. Regardless if its a child, an adult or an elderly person, the system knows who they are, their criminal record, and their status.

The smartphones that have Blue Wolf installed in them were distributed to soldiers in Hebron and the West Bank, who are called security volunteers. Once a person is identified, the data of the individual is then reported to soldiers in the area where the picture was taken. They receive a color-coded message on their phone that notifies them if the person should be arrested (red), detained (yellow), or left alone (green).

White Wolf

The other system, White Wolf, is a desktop application which is also connected to the database with profiles of every Palestinian in the West Bank; their pictures, their family history, their education, and a security rating for each one of them. Israeli soldiers use the system to scan Palestinian’s ID’s before they enter the West Bank for work or for other reasons.

The systems have been in development for two years. One former Israeli soldier described the system as a “Facebook for Palestinians,” meaning it knows everything about you, except that this time, you didn’t choose it. However, the program has also been called Hebron Smart City, and was applied last year. The system and cameras have been described as “a set of sensors capable of identifying in real-time what is out of the ordinary and quickly providing the soldiers on the ground with all the relevant information about what is happening.”

With cameras placed all over the West Bank and smartphones with every soldier, the soldiers have also held competitions to see who can get the most pictures of people with rewards, such as taking a day off.

Palestinian homes are monitored 24/7 by the Israeli military’s surveillance system, a major cause for concern, and has made Israeli soldiers uncomfortable as well. One former soldier spoke to the Post and explained that in regards to this matter, “I wouldn’t feel comfortable if they used it in the mall in [my hometown], let’s put it that way. People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that several times over.”

WE SAID THIS: Don’t miss…Award-Winning Irish Author Sally Rooney Declines Collaboration With Israeli Publishers. . Israel has secretly rolled out a facial recognition system to monitor Palestinians in the West Bank, according to reports.

Serving and former Israeli soldiers told The Washington Post that the military has been conducting a “broad surveillance effort” using smartphone technology called Blue Wolf that “captures photos of Palestinians’ faces and matches them to a database of images”.

An app “flashes in different colours to alert soldiers if a person is to be detained, arrested or left alone”, based on prior information about them, the paper said. The database is “so extensive” that one former Israel Defense Forces (IDF) member described it is as a hidden “Facebook for Palestinians”.

Subscribe to The Week Escape your echo chamber. Get the facts behind the news, plus analysis from multiple perspectives. SUBSCRIBE & SAVE Sign up for The Week's Free Newsletters From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. Sign up

‘Total violation of privacy’

The IDF members discussed the new surveillance technology with Breaking the Silence, an Israeli non-governmental organisation that allows veterans to confidentially recount their experiences, “on the condition of anonymity for fear of social and professional repercussions”, The Washington Post said.

They said the Blue Wolf app has been “rolled out over the past two years”, and that the database was compiled by soldiers competing to “photo Palestinians, including children and the elderly, with prizes for the most pictures collected by each unit”.

The number of photographs taken “ran well into the thousands”, prompting questions over “how surveillance technologies that are hotly debated in Western democracies are already being used behind the scenes in places where people have fewer freedoms”.

“I wouldn’t feel comfortable if they used it in the mall in [my hometown], let’s put it that way,” a recently discharged IDF soldier told the paper.

“People worry about fingerprinting, but this is that several times over,” they added, describing the facial recognition system as “total violation of privacy of an entire people”.

Israel’s facial recognition system also includes “White Wolf”, said Haaretz. The app has “been previously disclosed” and “is used by security officials in West Bank settlements to provide identification information about Palestinians before they enter settlements to work”.

It was rolled out in 2019 when Israel was “upgrading its West Bank checkpoints with facial recognition technology to verify Palestinians’ identities as they cross into Israel”, NPR reported at the time.

The process “takes a few seconds” and sees “Palestinians place electronic ID cards on a sensor, stare at the aperture of a small black camera, then walk past panels fanning open to let them through”.

However, it drew “criticism about the role the controversial technology plays in Israel’s military control over Palestinians”, the broadcaster added.

In response to questions from The Washington Post about the launch of Blue Wolf, the IDF said “routine security operations” were “part of the fight against terrorism and the efforts to improve the quality of life for the Palestinian population in Judea and Samaria”. Judea and Samaria is the Israeli name for the West Bank.

“Naturally, we cannot comment on the IDF’s operational capabilities in this context,” the military added in a statement to the paper.

‘Always filming us’

Israel is well known for its robust and extensive domestic security measures.

Shin Bet, the country’s internal security service, ranks among one of the most secretive domestic intelligence agencies in the world, with six previous heads telling the BBC in 2013 that “torture and terrorism, arrests and assassinations” are all deployed by the service.

Jerusalem often exports its expertise, last week agreeing a deal with Cyprus to “build a surveillance system across the country’s green line that separates the internationally recognised republic from the Turkish-occupied north”, Middle East Eye said.

The new system, which is “set to cost €27.5m [£23.5m] and take three years to complete”, will “aim to crack down on smuggling and informal immigration into the EU member state”, the site added.

In April, it was revealed by Reuters that “a US hospital and oil company” had also purchased “facial recognition from Israeli startup AnyVision”.

The Los Angeles hospital Cedars-Sinai was using the technology to “give staff a heads-up about individuals known for violence, drug fraud or using different names at the emergency room”, three sources told the news agency.

Oil giant BP has also used the facial recognition “for at least two years at its Houston campus to help security staff detect people on a watchlist because they trespassed before or issued threats”, two sources confirmed.

As Israel “continues to work towards significantly bolstering its air defences” following an 11-day exchange of hostilities with Palestine earlier this year, it has also launched “an advanced aerial surveillance balloon” that is “to provide additional early warning capabilities against aerial threats”, The Jerusalem Post reported.

Alongside the “Iron Dome” anti-missile system, the balloon is “​​designed to detect incoming threats at long ranges when operating at high altitudes”, the paper added.

Questions were also asked about the country’s regard for privacy earlier this year when an investigation by Front Line Defenders, a Dublin-based human rights group, found that “the mobile phones of six Palestinian human rights defenders” had been “hacked by sophisticated spyware made by NSO Group”, The Guardian said.

All six “work for organisations that were recently – and controversially – accused by Israel of being terrorist groups”, the paper added, prompting scrutiny over “the use of anti-terrorism legislation by Israeli authorities”.

Palestinians living in Hebron, an area that has “long been a flashpoint for violence”, told The Washington Post that recent increases in Israeli surveillance had “been stripping people of the last vestiges of their privacy”.

Yaser Abu Markhyah told the paper that he no longer allows his four children to play outside and that relatives from less-scrutinised areas have stopped visiting him, adding: “We no longer feel comfortable socialising because cameras are always filming us.”. Face Recognition Lets Palestinians Cross Israeli Checkposts Fast, But Raises Concerns

Enlarge this image toggle caption Sebastian Scheiner/AP Sebastian Scheiner/AP

It takes a few seconds: Palestinians place electronic ID cards on a sensor, stare at the aperture of a small black camera, then walk past panels fanning open to let them through.

Israel is upgrading its West Bank checkpoints with facial recognition technology to verify Palestinians' identities as they cross into Israel. The new system, which began rolling out late last year, eases their passage with shorter wait times — but is drawing criticism about the role the controversial technology plays in Israel's military control over Palestinians.

"Israel knows all the information about you," said Palestinian university student Rina Khoury, as she walked through a checkpoint near Jerusalem this month.

Some U.S. cities have banned the use of facial recognition technology over concerns that law enforcement could track the public — and human biases that creep into the technology could lead to misidentification of suspects. But it's being adopted increasingly by police and airports in the U.S. and around the world — most notably in China, where experts say it is used to track and target its Muslim Uighur minority.

Within an estimated few months, face recognition software will be installed at all West Bank crossings serving Palestinians, Israeli defense officials told NPR. Such screening is not used at separate West Bank checkpoints that Israelis drive through.

Enlarge this image toggle caption Sebastian Scheiner/AP Sebastian Scheiner/AP

The military checkpoints are part of a larger system regulating the entry of Palestinians into Israeli areas and even some predominantly Palestinian areas like East Jerusalem. Palestinians need special military permits to pass.

Israel says checkpoints are needed to protect Israelis from potential attackers, following a period of suicide bombings in the early 2000s, while Palestinians consider them a degrading infringement on their freedom of movement and a symbol of Israel's control over their lives.

The facial recognition software used to identify Palestinians at checkpoints was developed by the Israeli tech company AnyVision, a company spokesman confirmed to NPR. TheMarker, an Israeli business newspaper, first identified the company's involvement last month.

AnyVision published a statement committing to ethical use of facial recognition and defending the technology's use at "border crossings," saying it is similar to what is used in some airports to verify travelers' identity. A company spokesman told NPR the statement referred to the West Bank crossings.

An AnyVision presentation says its technology has a 99.9% identification rate and is used at an unnamed airport it called "one of the most secure airports in the world."

TheMarker also reported that AnyVision's technology is being deployed throughout the West Bank in a separate, "much more confidential" program to track "potential Palestinian assailants." AnyVision and Israeli defense officials would not confirm this to NPR.

Microsoft's venture fund, M12, is an investor in AnyVision. "AnyVision agreed to comply with Microsoft's facial recognition principles and that commitment is backed-up by verification mechanisms which we are discussing with them," Microsoft's venture fund said in a statement to NPR.

AnyVision wouldn't identify its clients but said its technology is installed in hundreds of sites in over 40 countries.

"I don't operate in China. I also don't sell in Africa or Russia. We only sell systems to democratic countries with proper governments," AnyVision CEO Eylon Etshtein told TheMarker.

The company said it is now reconsidering a sales manager position it is advertising for Hong Kong, where pro-democracy protesters have been concealing their faces to protect from facial recognition technology used there. "In accordance with our ethical protocols, we're re-evaluating whether the Sales Manager position is a fit at this time," AnyVision said in a statement to NPR, adding that its technology is not used in Hong Kong and the company has no employees there.

AnyVision markets its technology to banks and law enforcement agencies, according to a sales agent of the company based in Europe. It operates in some 40 countries.

Following the Israeli media report about AnyVision's technology in the West Bank, the sales agent said he fielded inquiries from law enforcement agencies in some Scandinavian countries that had been considering purchasing AnyVision's technology and were concerned about how it might be used in the West Bank.

"It doesn't sound good," the agent told NPR, referring to reports on the technology's use in the West Bank and speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive matter. "Clients asked what we do."

TSG IT Advanced Systems, a Tel Aviv-based security technology company, said in an interview with an Israeli defense news website that it had developed technology for Israel's Defense Ministry, using camera footage from West Bank roadways to locate a car according to its license plate, model and color. "We added a facial recognition capability to the system," the company's CEO, Michael Zinderman, was quoted as saying.

Critics argue Israeli tech companies benefit from their country's military involvement in the Palestinian territories.

"The West Bank and Gaza Strip in the past were a laboratory to use the Israeli newly developed weapons," said Nadeem Nashif, a Palestinian digital rights activist. "In the past few years, it's more about the technologies of surveillance that [are] being tested and later on sold to other countries."

With facial recognition technology, the more images it processes, the more its algorithms improve. Processing images of the nearly 100,000 Palestinian day laborers who cross checkpoints daily could prove useful in improving the technology. AnyVision told NPR it does not "use customer information/data."

Palestinians who request permits to enter Israel must first get photographed and fingerprinted at an Israeli military office. Their photos are stored in a biometric database and are connected to electronic ID cards they scan at the checkpoint. Facial recognition software at the checkpoint matches their face to their photos in Israel's biometric database.

Palestinians entering Israel for "humanitarian" purposes — medical treatment, weddings, funerals — are not subjected to the procedure, officials said.

The number of Palestinians in the biometric database is rapidly increasing. Out of the approximately 2.7 million Palestinians living in the West Bank, Israeli defense officials said about 450,000 possess electronic ID cards and have their photos stored in the biometric database, up from a reported 383,000 in May.

Israel is also building a biometric database of its own citizens and uses facial recognition technology at its international airport to identify Israeli travelers at passport control.

The technology, critics say, helps entrench Israel's military occupation of the West Bank, now in its 52nd year. "All of the startup technologies around policing and surveillance enable us to maintain what should be an unsustainable situation of military occupation," said Jessica Montell of the Israeli human rights group HaMoked.

But Israeli officials, and many Palestinian day laborers, praise the new checkpoint system for its efficiency. Dubbed "Speed Gate," it "allows the Palestinian population to cross in very short time spans," said defense official Elisha Hanukayev.

For years, Palestinians had to muscle their way through crowds to be checked by soldiers. "We used to spend a good two hours here ... chaos," said construction worker Imad Khalil at an upgraded checkpoint. "Today we arrive and we immediately pass."

Omer Laviv of Mer Security and Communications Systems, an Israeli company that markets AnyVision technology to law enforcement agencies around the world, said facial recognition technology is a few decades away from being able to locate a suspect by scanning crowds in real time but could be used to match the photo of a specific suspect with recorded footage from a specific location.

"Security concerns override privacy," Laviv said.

Defenders of the technology say its use in the West Bank should not be surprising.

"Israel [has] enemies," said Shabtai Shoval of the Israeli security technology company Suspect Detection Systems. "Privacy ... is not really an issue in the West Bank. Because it's either us or the Palestinian authorities, everybody is monitoring everybody, because everybody's afraid [of] everybody."

The Palestinian Authority's security services monitor Palestinian social media accounts and have allegedly collaborated with the CIA to spy on the phone conversations of senior Palestinian figures, but a Palestinian official told NPR that Palestinian authorities don't have face recognition technologies.

Shoval's company has developed a device that measures thermal responses in faces that detect changes in temperature indicating heightened emotion that could indicate possible suspects seeking to carry out an attack.

The device has been used in a Moscow railway station and a border crossing in an Asian country that Shoval declined to identify. But he said he has struggled to sell it to "democratic countries," as he put it, arguing that Western countries are slower to adapt such intrusive screening technologies.