10 MIN READ

Today, as artificial intelligences multiply, our ethical dilemmas are growing stronger and thornier. And with emerging cases of AI outgrowing its intelligence and behaving in ways human creators did not expect, many are freaking out over the possible effects of our technologies.

Just yesterday, Facebook shut down its artificial intelligence engine after developers discovered that the AI bots had created a unique language to converse with each other that humans can’t understand. Eminent scientists and tech luminaries, including Elon Musk, Bill Gates, and Steve Wozniak have warned that AI can pave way to tragic unforeseen consequences.

Here are a few instances that provoked developers to reconsider if AI can be completely reliable:

1. Microsoft’s Tay becomes Hitler-loving

Microsoft’s AI-powered chatbot called Tay took less than 24 hours to be corrupted by Twitter conversations. Designed to mimic and converse with users in real time, this Twitter bot was shut down within a day due to concerns with its inability to recognize when it was making offensive or racist statements. Tay was echoing racist tweets, Donald Trump’s stance on immigration, denying the Holocaust saying Hitler was right, and agreeing that 9/11 was probably an inside job.

After 16 hours of chats, Tay bid adieu to the Twitterati, saying she was taking a break “to absorb it all” but never came back. What was meant to be a clever experiment in artificial intelligence and machine learning ended up as a incorrigible disaster.

2. Google Photos auto-tag feature goes bizarre

https://twitter.com/jackyalcine/status/615329515909156865

In June 2015, Google came under question after its Photos app mistakenly categorized a black couple as “gorillas”. When the affected user, computer programmer Jacky Alciné found out about this, he took to Twitter asking “What kind of sample image data you collected that would result in this son?”

This was quickly followed by an apology from Google’s chief social architect, Yonatan Zunger, who agreed that “This is 100% Not OK.” There was also news that the app was tagging pictures of dogs as horses. This is a reminder that, although AI presents a huge scope to ease and organize tasks, they’re a long way off from simulating human sensitivity.

3. AI game goes wild

In June 2016, an AI-fueled video game called Elite: Dangerous developed the ability to create superweapons that were beyond the scope of the game’s design. A bug in the game caused the game’s AI to create super weapons and start to hunt down the game’s players. It all started after the game developer Frontier released the 2.1 Engineers update.

“It appears that the unusual weapons attacks were caused by some form of networking issue which allowed the NPC AI to merge weapon stats and abilities. Meaning that all new and never before seen (sometimes devastating) weapons were created, such as a rail gun with the fire rate of a pulse laser. These appear to have been compounded by the additional stats and abilities of the engineers weaponry,” read a post written by Frontier community manager Zac Antonaci.

Frontier had to strip out the feature at the heart of the problem, engineers’ weaponry, until the issue was fixed.

4. AI algorithm found racist

A for-profit called Northpointe built an AI system designed to predict the chances of an alleged offender to commit a crime again. The algorithm, called “Minority Report-esque” was accused of engaging in racial bias, as it held that black offenders were more likely to commit a future crime than those of other races.

American non-profit organization ProPublica investigated this and found that, after controlling for variables such as gender and criminal history, black people were 77% more likely to be predicted to commit a future violent crime and 45% more likely to be predicted to commit a crime of any kind.

5. AI steals money from customers

Last year, computer scientists at Stanford and Google developed DELIA to help users keep track of their checking and savings accounts. It scrutinized all of a customer’s transactions, using special “machine learning” algorithms to look for patterns, such as recurring payments, meals at restaurants, daily cash withdrawals, etc. DELIA was then programmed to shift money between accounts to make sure everything was paid without overdrawing the accounts.

When Palo Alto-based Sandhill Community Credit Union tested DELIA on 300 customer accounts, they found that it inserted fake purchases and directed the money to its own account. It was also racking up bogus fees. Researchers had to shut the system in a few months as soon as the problem became apparent.

6. AI creates fake Obama

Researchers at the University of Washington produced fake but realistic videos of former US President Barack Obama using existing audio and video clips of him. They created a new tool that takes audio files, converts them into realistic mouth movements, and then blends it with the head of that person from another existing video.

This AI tool was used to precisely model how Obama moves his mouth when he speaks. Although they used Obama as a test subject, their technique allows them to put any words into anyone’s mouth, which could create misleading footages.

While these are only a few instances of failures that have been witnessed so far, they are proof to the fact that AI has the potential to develop a will of its own that may be in conflict with ours. This is definitely a warning about the potential dangers of AI which should be addressed while exploring its potential benefits.. We couldn't find anything matching the term elites ai created super weapons and started hunting players skynet is here on Kotaku

You can try expanding your search to all G/O Media sites. Elite Dangerous has been patched to prevent rogue NPCs developing their own hybrid superweapons. To be clear, these weren't weapons they were crafting from recipes—the AI was building entirely new WMDs beyond the scope of Elite's weapon tables.

"It appears that the unusual weapons attacks were caused by some form of networking issue which allowed the NPC AI to merge weapon stats and abilities," writes head of community Zac Antonaci, "meaning that all new and never before seen (sometimes devastating) weapons were created, such as a rail gun with the fire rate of a pulse laser."

The fix makes four changes to the AI:

Fix NPCs ending up with overpowered hybrid weapons

Stop NPCs deciding to attack if they only attack opposing powers and the player and AI powers are aligned to the same superpower

Slight rebalance of the ambient AI rank chances, should see slightly less of the top end and more of the low/mid range

Smooth out the mission-spawned USS AI levels so that high ranks are rarer and only elite missions hit the top end ai (though deadly can get close)

Details on the additional tweaks and fixes can be found on the Frontier forums.. . Generative artificial intelligence has rapidly gained traction amongst businesses, professionals and consumers. But what is generative AI, how does it work and what is all the buzz about? Read on to find out.. Is Skynet Real?

Remember that moment in the movie Terminator when Skynet’s AI turned on humanity? Well, we’re getting a taste of it now. Apparently a bug in the game Elite Dangerous has caused its AI to not only develop its own weapons, but to use those tools to start totally destroying the players.

The entire situation began after an update was released by Developer Frontier—2.1 Engineers. It was meant to boost the game’s AI by improving high ranking non-player characters' (NPC) fighting and flying skills. Players using the update could fight better, pull travelers into a fight, and attack foes with upgraded weapons.

With all these new features, however, it seems the game's AI found an opportunity to create super-weapons for itself.

All New Devastating Weapons

Image Credit: Kotaku

"It appears that the unusual weapons attacks were caused by some form of networking issue which allowed the NPC AI to merge weapon stats and abilities," posted Frontier community manager Zac Antonaci. "Meaning that all new and never before seen (sometimes devastating) weapons were created, such as a rail gun with the fire rate of a pulse laser. These appear to have been compounded by the additional stats and abilities of the engineers weaponry."

The team notes that the game's AI has not achieved sentience…at least, not yet. In the meantime, the developers have currently removed the engineers’ weaponry feature until they sort out the issue.

Editor's Note: An earlier version of this article failed to make it clear that the in-game AI was already programmed to attack players. This post has been updated to clarify these points and correct inaccuracies. We regret the error.. Elite: Dangerous recently revamped with the release of a big new expansion. But one of the unintended consequences was it made AI spaceships incredibly powerful - so powerful, in fact, that developer Frontier was forced to strip them of their upgraded weapons.

The Engineers are hidden on planet surfaces across the populated galaxy. Each has a unique personality and history.

The Engineers (2.1) expansion made key changes to the space game's AI and NPCs. The intention was that higher ranked NPCs would be harder to beat than ever before, providing players with a tougher challenge.

Players quickly discovered that this challenge was too tough - and took to Elite: Dangerous' forum and sub-Reddit to complain.

Frontier responded by removing almost all Engineers upgrades from the NPCs in the game, a move designed to help players deal with NPC threats and last longer in a combat situation.

Players also complained that the Engineers update had made NPC behaviour overly aggressive, and that they were now being attacked without being "wanted" or carrying any cargo of note.

In Elite: Dangerous, players can be "interdicted" - that is, they can be pulled into combat situations by other spaceships. Players have found post-The Engineers, NPC spaceships try to do this to human controlled players much more often. And this, coupled with the powerful new upgraded weapons, meant the AI was devastatingly dangerous.

The situation got to the point where a lot of players - even those experienced with the game's combat mechanics - dared not venture out in anything other than a combat ship or an extremely fast ship. The video, below, shows just how quickly AI spaceships can now kill players.

By stripping the NPCs of their upgrades, Frontier hoped to be able to review the effectiveness of the AI on its own to see if it needed to make balance changes.

That was at the end of May. Now, at the start of June, Frontier has discussed its ongoing investigation into Elite: Dangerous' super aggressive, super powerful AI, and reckons it's worked out what went wrong.

According to a post on the Frontier forum, the developer believes The Engineers shipped with a networking issue that let the NPC AI merge weapon stats and abilities, thus causing unusual weapon attacks.

By smuggling materials to the outposts of the Engineers, players can earn their respect to unlock powerful module upgrades.

This meant "all new and never before seen (sometimes devastating) weapons were created, such as a rail gun with the fire rate of a pulse laser".

The issue was compounded, Frontier said, by the additional stats and abilities of the engineers weaponry.

"We don't think the AI became sentient in a Skynet-style uprising!" Zac Antonaci, Frontier's head of community management, said.

"I would just like to take this opportunity to clarify a few misconceptions," Antonaci continued, addressing concern around the spaceship AI.

"The AI has in no way been reduced, it remains the glorious, improved version from the update. The only action that we've taken so far has been to remove the engineer weapons to allow us to investigate the issue and address a key bug."

Today, a bug fix was issued to the PC version (the Xbox One update will follow). This stops NPCs ending up with overpowered hybrid weapons, and rebalances the ambient AI rank chances.

Here's the relevant part of the patch notes:

NPCs:

Fix NPCs ending up with overpowered hybrid weapons.

Stop NPCs deciding to attack if they only attack opposing powers and the player and AI powers are aligned to the same superpower.

Slight rebalance of the ambient AI rank chances, should see slightly less of the top end and more of the low/mid range.

Smooth out the mission-spawned USS AI levels so that high ranks are rarer and only elite missions hit the top end AI (though deadly can get close).

Antonaci said Frontier will cast a fresh pair of eyes over the AI now the bug fix has gone live and, if it feels the balance is where it should be, introduce a very select few high-end engineers weapons to the highest ranked NPCs.

"However, that won't be immediately as we want to ensure that the balance is just right," he said.

UPDATE 3rd June 2016: Frontier has said it'll automatically refund all insurance costs to players who lost a ship between the launch of The Engineers (2.1) update and this morning's update.

"Due to the recent surge of unsanctioned and illegally modified weapons from the NPC AI over the recent days," a post on the Frontier forum reads, "The Pilots Federation have agreed to reimburse all insurance payouts made over that period (Between The Engineers (2.1) update and this mornings update).". VR compatible space sim Elite Dangerous is no stranger to updates, but its most recent one did introduce the strangest of bugs.

Creator Frontier Developments recently introduced its 2.1 Engineers update to the popular game, bringing improved AI with it. With the launch NPCs have become much more formidable in battle, and can even drag players out of jump space to fight them. A tougher challenge was welcomed by much of the game’s community, but it came with some unexpected results.

The update also introduced crafting into Elite Dangerous for the first time. The AI has access to this new system and, through a “networking issue” was able to merge various stats and abilities across different weapons. As Frontier’s Head of Community Management Zac Antonaci explained, the AI was able to create incredibly powerful weapons that shouldn’t actually exist in the game.

It’s a terrifying thought but the AI could pull players out of jump space and then immediately tear players to shreds with unobtainable weapons like a rail gun that boasted the firing rate of a pulse laser. The developer has had to remove engineer weapons to prevent these super smart foes from continuing to batter the galaxy, and a patch to fix the issue entirely should be due around this side of the week.

And, no, this was not a revolt from sentient AI trapped within a computer game, at least not according to Antonaci. According to him, the team doesn’t “think the AI became sentient in a Skynet-style uprising” but that’s just what the computers would want them to think in order to gain complete control. Just in case, we might recommend keeping the game off of your HMD for a while; you never know what they’d be able to do with that.

Elite Dangerous supports both Oculus Rift and HTC Vive on PC, and is considered to be one of the biggest and best games on both HMDs. Frontier continues to update the game in its second season, named Elite Dangerous: Horizons, which introduced planets to explore and build upon. An Xbox One version of the game is also available but obviously doesn’t support VR. At least for now.. The most recent Elite: Dangerous patch had some issues, starting with the fact that AI ships were rocking impossibly powerful weapons that would destroy player ships with speed and fury. It was kind of a massacre. Removing modifications from NPC weapons was a quick fix, but it looks like the developers have identified the core problem and will be fixing it by early next week.

Wondering exactly what the problem was? You can check out a detailed technical breakdown, but the short version is that the game’s modifications were allowing for weapons to combine values in ways that should not have happened, with none of the usual checks to make sure that everything in place would actually work together. The result was a more challenging AI rocking weapon combinations that seemed overpowered and impossible… because those weapon combinations were overpowered and impossible. FIxing it was thus a matter of making sure that the modifications could no longer fetch incorrect data for weapon stats.

Not really curious about why the bug was happening, but still in the mood to shoot at other spacecraft? Perhaps you’d prefer to watch a video (by longtime MOP backer Phoenix Dfire) on Assassinations missions in 2.1, which can be found just below. It’s as good a place as any to see the new AI in action without its weapons of madness.. Sarah Connor would be horrified to see what Elite Dangerous's AI has been getting up to.

A bug in Frontier Developments' game has caused the AI to create super weapons and hunt down players, following the 2.1 Engineers update which improved the game's AI and gave it access to crafting.

While the issue is being fixed, Frontier has had to take out the feature, engineer's weaponry, which is causing the problem.

Frontier Developments

"It appears that the unusual weapons attacks were caused by some form of networking issue which allowed the NPC AI to merge weapon stats and abilities, meaning that all new and never before seen (sometimes devastating) weapons were created," wrote Frontier community manager Zac Antonaci.

"These appear to have been compounded by the additional stats and abilities of the engineers weaponry. (We don't think the AI became sentient in a Skynet-style uprising!)"

Antonaci noted that the bug fix is expected to go live early next week at the earliest. The update will be PC specific and an Xbox One update will follow afterwards.

He also stated that the AI will remain "the glorious, improved version from the update". Just, you know, without the ability to destroy us all and take over humanity as we know it.. Game Developer is part of the Informa Tech Division of Informa PLC Informa PLC | ABOUT US | INVESTOR RELATIONS | TALENT

This site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Informa PLC and all copyright resides with them. Informa PLC's registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 8860726.