On an early April morning, around 4 am, a San Francisco Fire Department truck responding to a fire tried to pass a doubled-parked garbage truck by using the opposing lane. But a traveling autonomous vehicle, operated by the General Motors subsidiary Cruise without anyone inside, was blocking its path. While a human might have reversed to clear the lane, the Cruise car stayed put. The fire truck only passed the blockage when the garbage truck driver ran from their work to move their vehicle.

“This incident slowed SFFD response to a fire that resulted in property damage and personal injuries,” city officials wrote in a filing submitted to the California Public Utilities Commission. The city wrote that the fire department is concerned that Cruise vehicles stop too often in travel lanes, which could have a “negative impact” on fire department response times.

It’s the most unnerving of a handful of incidents involving Cruise vehicles alleged by the city of San Francisco, as officials object to parts of a proposed permit program being crafted by the California Public Utilities Commission, which regulates ride-hail across the state.

Tiffany Testo, a spokesperson for Cruise, confirmed the incident. She said the driverless car had correctly yielded to the oncoming fire truck in the opposing lane and contacted the company’s remote assistance workers, who are able to operate vehicles in trouble from afar. According to Cruise, which collects camera and sensor data from its testing vehicles, the fire truck was able to move forward approximately 25 seconds after it first encountered the autonomous vehicle. In a statement, Testo says that Cruise “works closely with first responders, including SFFD, and have been in contact with them regarding this encounter.” The city’s filing said the department has requested a meeting with Cruise about the incident, but that it has yet to take place.

The SFFD also confirmed the incident, which involved Engine 12, based in the city's Parnassus Heights neighborhood. "Pre-Covid, the department was in discussions with both electric (EV) and autonomous vehicles for training," said SFFD spokesperson Jonathan Baxter in a statement. "We have been successful with EV training and continue to seek industry training related to autonomous vehicles."

Even as autonomous vehicle software advances, it will continue to run into these flukes.

In San Francisco, Cruise is just one of the dueling self-driving car developers that say they’re working to build a safer driving future. Waymo, an Alphabet company and a spinoff from Google, and Zoox, now owned by Amazon, both have a presence on the city’s steep, winding roads, and locals don’t have to travel far to see sensor-laden Jaguar I-Paces, Chevrolet Bolts, and Toyota Highlanders tracing routes around downtown and residential neighborhoods. Now Cruise is applying for a permit that would allow it to launch the state’s first driverless ride-hail service. The sprawling, expensive science experiment could also change the way many city dwellers navigate their cities.

San Francisco alleges two more incidents: one, in late April, in which a Cruise vehicle traveling through a work zone stopped in a crosswalk and didn’t move for five minutes, blocking traffic; and another in April, captured on camera, in which police officers stopped a Cruise vehicle without a driver because it didn't have its headlights on.

The filing comes as a state agency is in the midst of writing rules that would allow Cruise to move ahead with its plans to operate limited but paid ride-hail services across the state. In San Francisco, a new permit would expand Cruise’s existing program. It currently allows select members of the pubic to take autonomous rides between 10 pm and 6 am, in 70 percent of the city. If the company wins a new permit, it could start to collect fares for the rides, which would still occur at night and in the early morning, and not in rain or fog. It would mark the launch of the state’s first driverless ride-hail service.. It's one of a trio of cases giving San Francisco city officials pause as autonomous regulations are crafted

Early last month, a fire truck on its way to an emergency was prevented from moving forward, in part, by a Cruise AV test vehicle. This is one of a handful of incidents giving San Francisco city officials pause as a proposed permit program is being crafted for autonomous ride-hailing vehicles.

The event took place on an April morning at around 4 a.m. as emergency responders were answering a call, reports Wired. Their progress was blocked by a double-parked garbage truck and as they pulled around to pass it, a Cruise AV test vehicle going in the other direction stopped next to the garbage truck, blocking the road completely.

“This incident slowed SFFD response to a fire that resulted in property damage and personal injuries,” city officials wrote in a filing submitted to the California Public Utilities Commission.

Read Also: Cops Pull Over Driverless Cruise Chevy Bolt In San Francisco For Driving Without Its Lights On

A Cruise spokesperson confirmed the incident to Wired, adding that the vehicle behaved as designed, yielding to the oncoming fire truck and contacting the company’s remote assistance workers. According to the company, the fire truck was blocked for 25 seconds.

The blockage was not cleared, however, until the garbage truck‘s driver ran from their work to move the vehicle. Some have pointed out that if a human had been driving the Cruise AV, they could have simply backed up to let the fire truck through. It also bears repeating that every second counts when an emergency responder is on their way to a call.

The San Francisco Fire Department confirmed the incident, too, stating that although it had been in discussions with electric and autonomous vehicle manufacturers for training before the pandemic, “we have been successful with EV training and continue to seek industry training related to autonomous vehicles.”

This is just one of a trio of incidents that San Francisco city officials pointed to in filings objecting to certain parts of a proposed permit program that is being crafted by the California Public Utilities Commission, which regulates ride-hailing across the state.

The second was a highly publicized incident in which a Cruise vehicle was pulled over driving at night without its headlights on. The third happened in late April and allegedly involved another Cruise vehicle that stopped in a crosswalk while driving through a work zone, blocking traffic for five minutes.

These incidents point to the challenges of designing autonomous vehicles that can handle so-called edge cases in which something unlikely or unexpected happens on the road. Although a human driver would likely be able to reason out a solution, autonomous vehicles have a harder time responding to those events.

These edge cases are so challenging that some in the autonomous vehicle industry have reportedly conceded that no automaker will ever build a car that is truly capable of Level 5 fully autonomous driving.. Two Cruise robotaxis drive through police tape into an emergency scene, where electrical wires became snarled on the rooftop lidar sensors.

San Francisco is in an uproar over robotaxis’ persistent interference with firefighters, police officers and other emergency medical personnel.

The city’s fire chief called attention Thursday to the potentially dangerous encounters between driverless cabs and first responders, telling The Times in an interview that she was “fed up” with the incidents, which include robotaxis driving into active emergency scenes and parking on a fire hose.

Now San Francisco’s police union has joined city officials in urging regulators to postpone a vote, scheduled for Thursday, on a measure that would allow Waymo, Cruise and other robotaxi companies to expand in San Francisco. (After this story published, the vote was pushed to July 13.)

Advertisement

The San Francisco Police Officers Assn. has delivered a letter to the California Public Utilities Commission, which regulates driverless car operations in the state, asking that it “reconsider the agenda items” at its upcoming meeting and postpone a vote until the issue is addressed.

“While we all applaud the advancements in technology, we must not be in such a rush that we forget the human element and [that] ... such technology unchecked can create dangerous situations,” union President Tracy McCray said.

The commission has not responded to multiple requests for comment.

Waymo spokesperson Katherine Barna said in a statement: “As we operate in some of the densest parts of San Francisco and Phoenix, we navigate and interact with active emergency vehicles day and night, smoothly. In fact, we encounter an active [emergency vehicle] every 100 miles in our [more than 2 million] miles of rider-only driving.

“The vast majority of these often challenging and complex encounters have been without issue.”

Barna also noted that the company provides training to emergency personnel “and provides a phone number to reach Waymo directly in the event of a stop.”

Hannah Lindow, spokesperson for Cruise, sent a statement as well.

“Improving road safety is our chief mission — not only for Cruise passengers but for everyone we share the road with,” she said. “That includes making sure our vehicles are operating with as minimal impact as possible to city services. We’ve long met regularly with San Francisco city officials and first responders, and look forward to continuing our open line of communication with them.”

Advertisement

Lindow also said that Cruise has driven more than 2 million miles without life-threatening injuries or deaths, and that policymakers should also consider the “deeply troubling status quo” of injuries and road deaths in San Francisco.

Both companies have been running small-scale passenger services in San Francisco.

For the record: An earlier version of this story said Waymo charges for rides while Cruise does not. Cruise charges for rides, while Waymo doesn’t yet but is seeking to do so.

Cruise, which requires passengers to apply for the program, charges for rides. Waymo doesn’t yet charge but is seeking a green light to do so at next week’s Public Utilities Commission meeting.

If the proposal is approved, it would also allow an unlimited number of Waymo and Cruise robotaxis to operate and collect fares in all parts of the city in any kind of weather.

Waymo and robotaxi company Motional are planning to begin driverless passenger service in Los Angeles and Santa Monica when they get permits from the Public Utilities Commission. In written comments to the commission, the transportation departments of both cities have expressed concerns about how driverless technology is being managed by state regulators.

The San Francisco Fire Department has reported at least 39 interference incidents so far this year, including robotaxis stopping in front of firehouse driveways, blocking emergency vehicles trying to respond to emergencies, driving through police tape, driving into downed electrical wires that then became tangled on their rooftop sensors, pulling into active fire scenes and stopping (in one instance, a fire hose got caught around the car’s axle), and stopping close enough behind a firetruck to interfere with the unloading of ladders at a fire scene.

When delivery trucks and other vehicles double-park or otherwise block the road, in most cases the driver is in the vehicle or nearby. But when a Waymo or Cruise car is stuck in the road, firefighters must try to communicate with the operating company over a radio.

Sometimes a remote operator is able to move the vehicle. Sometimes the Fire Department must wait for a human employee to arrive and move the car.

Advertisement

There have been no reported deaths or injuries as a result, but Jeanine Nicholson, San Francisco’s fire chief, told ABC7 News Bay Area on Thursday, after The Times broke the story, that “the biggest concern is that someone is going to get really severely injured or killed.”

“We’ve really gotten lucky so far,” the chief said. “But it’s only a matter of time before something really, really catastrophic happens.”

No one involved in the debate disputes the idea that automated vehicles hold great promise for safety and accessibility. Nicholson told The Times she believes robotaxi AI needs to get a lot better at dealing with emergency scenes before any fleet expansion.

Why these high-tech vehicles, with their sensors and artificial intelligence programming, have problems with emergency vehicles is unclear. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration launched an investigation into Tesla after that company’s driver-assist software apparently led to multiple collisions with parked police cars, ambulances and firetrucks.

Public data on autonomous vehicle safety issues are hard to come by. NHTSA requires serious collisions to be reported to the agency, although it shields most of the narrative description of crashes from the public.

The California Department of Motor Vehicles requires that robotaxi companies report collisions of any type. But in 2021, the DMV asked Waymo to sue the agency, then the two worked out a court-approved deal that allows robotaxi companies to claim trade secrets to keep safety information from the public.

Advertisement

The DMV appears to interpret that settlement broadly. As a result of the agreement, even facts about how a robotaxi company responds in emergencies can be blacked out on ostensibly public crash reports.

On Thursday, more than two years after the Public Utilities Commission approved passenger fare service by driverless vehicles, the agency held what it says will be a series of workshops on what driverless data should be collected and how much of it should be made available to the public.

Two of the five commissioners, Genevieve Shiroma and John Reynolds, presided at the workshop. Shiroma previously served in state government roles; Reynolds most recently served as the top attorney at Cruise.