On the Clock On the Clock is Motherboard's reporting on the organized labor movement, gig work, automation, and the future of work. See More →

Amazon delivery drivers nationwide have to sign a "biometric consent" form this week that grants the tech behemoth permission to use AI-powered cameras to access drivers' location, movement, and biometric data. Amazon delivery drivers nationwide have to sign a "biometric consent" form this week that grants the tech behemoth permission to use AI-powered cameras to access drivers' location, movement, and biometric data.

If the company’s delivery drivers, who number around 75,000 in the United States, refuse to sign these forms, they lose their jobs. The form requires drivers to agree to facial recognition and other biometric data collection within the trucks they drive. If the company’s delivery drivers, who number around 75,000 in the United States, refuse to sign these forms, they lose their jobs. The form requires drivers to agree to facial recognition and other biometric data collection within the trucks they drive.

Advertisement

"Amazon may… use certain Technology that processes Biometric Information, including on-board safety camera technology which collects your photograph for the purposes of confirming your identity and connecting you to your driver account," the form reads. "Using your photograph, this Technology, may create Biometric Information, and collect, store, and use Biometric Information from such photographs." "Amazon may… use certain Technology that processes Biometric Information, including on-board safety camera technology which collects your photograph for the purposes of confirming your identity and connecting you to your driver account," the form reads. "Using your photograph, this Technology, may create Biometric Information, and collect, store, and use Biometric Information from such photographs."

It adds that "this Technology tracks vehicle location and movement, including miles driven, speed, acceleration, braking, turns, and following distance ...as a condition of delivery packages for Amazon, you consent to the use of Technology." It adds that "this Technology tracks vehicle location and movement, including miles driven, speed, acceleration, braking, turns, and following distance ...as a condition of delivery packages for Amazon, you consent to the use of Technology."

In February, Amazon In February, Amazon announced plans to install the AI-powered four-lens cameras, made by the tech company Netradyne, in all of its Amazon-branded delivery vans. The company says cameras are being used to improve "safety" and the "quality of the delivery experience." But as Thomson Reuters reported earlier this month, some drivers are quitting their jobs because of privacy concerns. The Netradyne cameras are able to sense when a driver yawns, appears distracted, or isn't wearing a seatbelt, according to a product description , and monitor drivers' body and facial movements.

Advertisement

“Netradyne cameras are used to help keep drivers and the communities where we deliver safe,” said Deborah Bass, a spokesperson for Amazon. “We piloted the technology from April to October 2020 on over two million miles of delivery routes and the results produced remarkable driver and community safety improvements—accidents decreased 48 percent, stop sign violations decreased 20 percent, driving without a seatbelt decreased 60 percent, and distracted driving decreased 45 percent. Don’t believe the self-interested critics who claim these cameras are intended for anything other than safety.” “Netradyne cameras are used to help keep drivers and the communities where we deliver safe,” said Deborah Bass, a spokesperson for Amazon. “We piloted the technology from April to October 2020 on over two million miles of delivery routes and the results produced remarkable driver and community safety improvements—accidents decreased 48 percent, stop sign violations decreased 20 percent, driving without a seatbelt decreased 60 percent, and distracted driving decreased 45 percent. Don’t believe the self-interested critics who claim these cameras are intended for anything other than safety.”

Technically, these drivers aren't even employed by Amazon, but by roughly 800 companies, known as delivery service partners that operate out of Amazon delivery stations. Still, Amazon controls many aspects of its drivers working conditions, from their training to their uniforms to their delivery quotas. Technically, these drivers aren't even employed by Amazon, but by roughly 800 companies, known as delivery service partners that operate out of Amazon delivery stations. Still, Amazon controls many aspects of its drivers working conditions, from their training to their uniforms to their delivery quotas.

"I had one driver who refused to sign," the owner of an Amazon delivery company in the Pacific Northwest told Motherboard. Motherboard granted the business owner anonymity because they feared retaliation from Amazon. "It's a heart-breaking conversation when someone tells you that you're their favorite person they have ever worked for, but Amazon just micromanages them too much." "I had one driver who refused to sign," the owner of an Amazon delivery company in the Pacific Northwest told Motherboard. Motherboard granted the business owner anonymity because they feared retaliation from Amazon. "It's a heart-breaking conversation when someone tells you that you're their favorite person they have ever worked for, but Amazon just micromanages them too much."

Do you have a tip to share with us about Amazon? Please get in touch with the reporter Lauren at lauren.gurley@vice.com or via Signal 201-8972-2109.. On the Clock On the Clock is Motherboard's reporting on the organized labor movement, gig work, automation, and the future of work. See More →

Amazon is planning on installing surveillance cameras inside vehicles in its delivery fleet to watch delivery drivers, Amazon is planning on installing surveillance cameras inside vehicles in its delivery fleet to watch delivery drivers, The Information reported on Wednesday.

The idea is to surveil drivers and alert them to poor habits while also sending recordings back to Amazon in a bit to increase safety, but, as has been well-documented already, the real safety problem at Amazon is its own treatment of workers and the demands it places on them. And for that, there isn’t a simple technological fix. The idea is to surveil drivers and alert them to poor habits while also sending recordings back to Amazon in a bit to increase safety, but, as has been well-documented already, the real safety problem at Amazon is its own treatment of workers and the demands it places on them. And for that, there isn’t a simple technological fix.

Advertisement

In an unlisted video on Vimeo posted last week, Karolina Haraldsdottir, Amazon's senior manager for last-mile safety, goes over Amazon's rationale for further expanding its already wide-ranging surveillance network and turning its watchful eye on delivery drivers. The problem, Haraldsdottir explains, is that drivers not only need help being safe but they also need to be held accountable for when they act unsafely. In an unlisted video on Vimeo posted last week, Karolina Haraldsdottir, Amazon's senior manager for last-mile safety, goes over Amazon's rationale for further expanding its already wide-ranging surveillance network and turning its watchful eye on delivery drivers. The problem, Haraldsdottir explains, is that drivers not only need help being safe but they also need to be held accountable for when they act unsafely.

“Our intention with this technology is to set up drivers for success and provide them support in being safer on-road and handling incidents if and when they happen,” she says in the video. “Our intention with this technology is to set up drivers for success and provide them support in being safer on-road and handling incidents if and when they happen,” she says in the video.

The Netradyne surveillance system, called Driveri, will help realize "improved driver behavior" through “audible driver coaching.” Driveri will be activated by a multitude of “signals” that trigger the surveillance system such as speeding, failure to stop at a stop sign, hard braking and acceleration, seat belt compliance, U-turns, and more. The system will upload video of infractions, giving audio cues for some actions but not for others, and the video shows the system chastising a driver for pulling out his phone and another for speeding. The Netradyne surveillance system, called Driveri, will help realize "improved driver behavior" through “audible driver coaching.” Driveri will be activated by a multitude of “signals” that trigger the surveillance system such as speeding, failure to stop at a stop sign, hard braking and acceleration, seat belt compliance, U-turns, and more. The system will upload video of infractions, giving audio cues for some actions but not for others, and the video shows the system chastising a driver for pulling out his phone and another for speeding.

The problem, however, is that many of these “signals” occur because of how unsafe and demanding driving for Amazon is. The problem, however, is that many of these “signals” occur because of how unsafe and demanding driving for Amazon is.

For years, it has been well-documented that Amazon's delivery network has prioritized near-instantaneous delivery times over safety. In 2019, Caroline O'Donovan and Ken Bensinger For years, it has been well-documented that Amazon's delivery network has prioritized near-instantaneous delivery times over safety. In 2019, Caroline O'Donovan and Ken Bensinger reported for Buzzfeed News how Amazon created a system that "shed costs and liability" by using third-party companies to directly pick up and deliver from Amazon facilities. Amazon’s system "goes further than gig companies such as Uber'' in that it contracts companies who hire drivers, meaning Amazon “divorces itself from the people delivering its packages.” As a result, when "intense pressure created by Amazon's punishing targets" results in horrible working conditions, injuries, deaths, or bankruptcies, Amazon can "wash its hands of any responsibility."

Advertisement

Buzzfeed News' reporting found that pressures to meet Amazon's demanding targets was so extreme that drivers piled parcels so high on their dashboards that windshields were obscured. Buzzfeed News' reporting found that pressures to meet Amazon's demanding targets was so extreme that drivers piled parcels so high on their dashboards that windshields were obscured.

Later that year, ProPublica and Buzzfeed News Later that year, ProPublica and Buzzfeed News co-published an article that found that Amazon consistently prioritized rapidly growing a convenient, nearly instantaneous delivery network over a safe one. "Time after time, internal documents and interviews with company insiders show, Amazon officials have ignored or overlooked signs that the company was overloading its fast-growing delivery network while eschewing the expansive sort of training and oversight provided by a legacy carrier like UPS."

The ProPublica-Buzzfeed report makes clear that whenever the opportunity arose, the company "repeatedly quashed or delayed safety initiatives out of concern that they could jeopardize its mission of satisfying customers with ever-faster delivery." When concern was shown for drivers, it was in creating a liability system that "keeps a tight grip on how drivers working for contractors do their jobs" while telling courts it wasn’t responsible for third-party companies exploiting workers or failing to adopt adequate safety measures. The ProPublica-Buzzfeed report makes clear that whenever the opportunity arose, the company "repeatedly quashed or delayed safety initiatives out of concern that they could jeopardize its mission of satisfying customers with ever-faster delivery." When concern was shown for drivers, it was in creating a liability system that "keeps a tight grip on how drivers working for contractors do their jobs" while telling courts it wasn’t responsible for third-party companies exploiting workers or failing to adopt adequate safety measures.

A separate 2019 investigation by NBC News reiterated a similar point, finding safety was consistently sacrificed when Amazon applied pressure to meet rising demand and punishing targets. Some managers disregarded background checks, allowing drivers who were not adequately prepared for routes to operate vehicles filled beyond normal capacity as a result. Yet another investigation, this time by ProPublica and the New York Times, detailed how Amazon "escapes responsibility for its role in deaths and serious injuries" despite tightly managing third-party delivery drivers.

Road safety is hugely important. But in each and every investigation of the safety of Amazon’s delivery network, a key point has emerged: safety is secondary to Amazon’s desire to increase the volume of deliveries while reducing labor costs and minimizing liability. This is not something that can be addressed by embedding surveillance cameras into every fleet to record and chirp at drivers as they attempt to meet unrealistic targets. Road safety is hugely important. But in each and every investigation of the safety of Amazon’s delivery network, a key point has emerged: safety is secondary to Amazon’s desire to increase the volume of deliveries while reducing labor costs and minimizing liability. This is not something that can be addressed by embedding surveillance cameras into every fleet to record and chirp at drivers as they attempt to meet unrealistic targets.

“We are investing in safety across our operations and recently started rolling out industry leading camera-based safety technology across our delivery fleet,” an Amazon spokesperson told Motherboard. “This technology will provide drivers real-time alerts to help them stay safe when they are on the road.” “We are investing in safety across our operations and recently started rolling out industry leading camera-based safety technology across our delivery fleet,” an Amazon spokesperson told Motherboard. “This technology will provide drivers real-time alerts to help them stay safe when they are on the road.”



. For Vic, an Amazon driver since 2019, the company's decision to install a four-lens, AI-powered camera in his van was the final indignity. This month, he quit

*Amazon is rolling out AI-powered cameras in its branded delivery vans

*Some workers say the cameras violate their privacy and worry who gets their data

*Five U.S. Senators have written to Amazon seeking an explanation

By Avi Asher-Schapiro

March 19 (Thomson Reuters Foundation) – When Vic started delivering packages for Amazon in 2019, he enjoyed it - the work was physical, he liked the autonomy, and it let him explore new neighborhoods in Denver, Colorado.

But Vic, who asked to be referred to by his first name for fear of retaliation, did not like the sensation that he was constantly under surveillance.

At first, it was Amazon’s “Mentor” app that constantly monitored his driving, phone use and location, generating a score for bosses to evaluate his performance on the road.

“If we went over a bump, the phone would rattle, the Mentor app would log that I used the phone while driving, and boom, I’d get docked,” he said.

Then, Amazon started asking him to post “selfies” before each shift on Amazon Flex, another app he had to install.

“I had already logged in with my keycard at the beginning of the shift, and now they want a photo? It was too much," he said.

The final indignity, he said, was Amazon's decision to install a four-lens, AI-powered camera in delivery vehicles that would record and analyse his face and body the entire shift.

This month, Vic put in his two-week notice and quit, ahead of a March 23 deadline for all workers at his Denver dispatch location to sign release forms authorising Amazon to film them and collect and store their biometric information.

“It was both a privacy violation, and a breach of trust,” he said. “And I was not going to stand for it.”

The camera systems, made by U.S.-based firm Netradyne, are part of a nationwide effort by Amazon to address concerns over accidents involving its increasingly ubiquitous delivery vans.

Amazon did not respond to a request for comment, but has previously told the Thomson Reuters Foundation that access to the footage was limited, and video would only be uploaded after an unsafe driving incident was detected.

Albert Fox Cahn, who runs the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project - a privacy organisation - said the Amazon cameras were part of a worrying, new trend.

"As cameras get cheaper and artificial intelligence becomes more powerful, these invasive tracking systems are increasingly the norm," he said.

YAWNING MAN

The cameras are equipped with sensors that pick up if a driver yawns, drives without a seatbelt, or appears distracted, according to a product description posted online.

If any such behaviours are detected, the camera records the incident and shares it with the dispatcher.

Vic’s local delivery hub, an independently-owned Amazon contractor that cannot be identified to protect the driver's anonymity, was chosen to help pilot the project more than a year ago, Vic said.

At the time, Vic told his supervisors he thought the devices were intrusive and insulting, sending the message that he could only do a good job if closely observed.

Up until this month, he had largely been able to request vans without the cameras installed.

But there were a few times he did drive a van equipped with the cameras. At the end of his shift his supervisor showed him all the images that had been captured.

Each time the camera's AI detected an anomaly in Vic's behavior - a yawn, a glance at his phone - it started recording, and saving the footage.

Vic felt violated.

“We are all out there to do a job. And if they don’t trust us to do the job -if they feel like they need to be watching us 24-7, why did they hire us? Why are we on the payroll?”

Eventually, his DSP told Vic that cameras were going to become mandatory company policy for all vans all the time, and he would have to agree to be filmed, or seek other work.

On March 2, he got a notification in his Amazon Flex App that he would now have to sign a consent form to allow Amazon to film him at work, as cameras were going in all vans.

He had until March 23 to sign up.

When Vic read the documents, he was disturbed to read that Amazon reserved the right to “share the information....with Third-party service providers” and “Amazon group affiliates”.

That struck Vic as odd; Fox Cahn saw the hand of lawyers.

"These policies look like they were written by expensive lawyers with the sole focus of protecting Amazon's bottom line - not the privacy of their workers," said the privacy expert.

"The way they are written basically reserves the right for Amazon to do just about anything they want with this data."

IN SENATORS' SIGHTS

The policies also caught the attention of U.S. lawmakers.

In a letter to Amazon on March 3, five Democratic senators raised concerns about the cameras' privacy implications.

They also asked Amazon to “identify any third parties with which Amazon has shared or plans to share” their footage.

Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts, one of the signatories, told the Thomson Reuters Foundation that Amazon had not replied.

“Protecting safety on our roads is vital, but so is protecting the rights of workers," he said by email. "The surveillance system Amazon is deploying in its vehicle fleet raises serious concerns about privacy and worker oversight."

The senators echoed another concerns of Vic’s: that there was no way to opt out of the surveillance, even for drivers with stellar safety records.

“I was the top driver at my dispatch,” Vic said, noting that he had no accidents in two years of work. “If Amazon wanted to improve safety, there are a lot of other things they could do."

He worried the cameras were a way to put the burden of safety onto drivers, instead of investing in better training.

On online Reddit forums frequented by Amazon drivers, dozens have complained about the cameras and their lack of choice.

Ultimately, Vic says he was forced to prioritise his privacy or his livelihood, calling it "a sort of coercion”.

He has found another job with another delivery company that does not use cameras - but worries about his friends at Amazon.

“I wanted to show up and do my job -- not to be watched all the time -- and that was not an option," he said. "It’s not a choice anyone should have to make.”

Related stories:

'Dystopia Prime:' Amazon AI van cameras spark surveillance concerns

Under watch: Indian city workers protest digital surveillance

As bosses embrace tech to monitor remote workers, can privacy endure?

(Reporting by Avi Asher-Schapiro @AASchapiro, Editing by Lyndsay Griffiths. Please credit the Thomson Reuters Foundation, the charitable arm of Thomson Reuters, that covers the lives of people around the world who struggle to live freely or fairly. Visit http://news.trust.org)

Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.. Five senators are calling on Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos to provide more information on the company's recent deployment of "surveillance cameras" in vehicles used by contracted delivery drivers.

In a letter Wednesday, Sens. Ed Markey of Massachusetts, Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Cory Booker of New Jersey and Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut asked for more clarity on Amazon's use of footage collected by the cameras and the scope of their use, with a deadline for Bezos to respond by March 24.

The letter was in response to reporting by CNBC in February, which revealed that Amazon recently began rolling out cameras from Netradyne in vehicles at a handful of contracted delivery partners across the U.S. The cameras, which Amazon said record drivers "100% of the time," have four lenses that capture the road, the driver, and both sides of the vehicle. The cameras are equipped with software that's capable of flagging a series of safety infractions, including failure to stop at a stop sign, speeding and distracted driving.

In a training video distributed to delivery firms, Amazon said the cameras will help improve safety across its delivery network, but drivers and privacy advocates raised concerns about the potential for heightened employee surveillance and a lack of privacy.

The senators called on Bezos to address these concerns, adding that the company's use of surveillance cameras in delivery vans "raises important privacy and worker oversight questions that Amazon must answer."

"While we applaud efforts to improve safety on the roads and decrease the plague of distracted driving, we need a better understanding of how your company will protect against potential new safety hazards stemming from increased worker surveillance," the senators wrote. "Although Amazon may intend for its use of Driveri cameras to improve safety on the road, this surveillance could, in practice, create significant pressure on drivers to speed up on their routes, which can lead to driver fatigue and decreased safety."

The Netradyne cameras are just one way that Amazon seeks to monitor and track its delivery service partner program, which refers to the network of Amazon-branded cargo vans responsible for a growing share of the company's last-mile deliveries.

As CNBC previously reported, Amazon also requires contracted delivery drivers to download and continuously run a smartphone app called Mentor that monitors their driving behavior while they're on the job. The app is designed to improve driver safety, but some delivery drivers have described the app as invasive and raised concerns that bugs within the app can sometimes lead to unfair disciplinary actions from their manager.