ARTICLE TITLE: Tesla Autopilot Misidentified On-Road Horse-Drawn Carriage
Tesla, the automobile giant and the market leader in electric vehicles thanks to its cutting-edge driving technology, including ‘self-driving/autopilot’ feature, found itself a target of snide remarks from bemused netizens.

Although the autopilot feature is undoubtedly futuristic, several incidents have been reported which show several disadvantages. Recently a video went viral showing tesla’s software mistaking a horse carriage for a truck, shocking social media users. The video was posted by a username (@_realrusty) on Instagram and has over 600K views.

In the video, the images on the screen depict a truck, a sedan, and a guy following the sedan. All of those bear no resemblance to a horse and buggy.

Tesla’s self-driving software is today’s reality. Netizens considered the video to be entertaining as they see artificial intelligence (AI) make mistakes. The comment section was quickly filled with amusing comments from internet users, including ‘Tesla vs Horse Carriage,’ ‘Elon should repair this,’ and ‘Bro is playing prop hunt.’

Elon Musk, Tesla CEO was accused of making false promises regarding its Autopilot and Full-Driving (FSD) technologies by the California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) a few days ago.

The filing said that Tesla “wrongly implies” that vehicles with the technology can drive themselves.

The DMV cited details from Tesla’s Autopilot page, where it is said that the FSD system ‘is designed to be able to conduct short and long-distance trips with no action required by the person in the driver's seat’ and is capable of navigating urban streets, complex intersections and freeways, reported Zee News.

(With inputs from agencies). A Tesla's Autopilot system appeared to confuse a horse-drawn carriage for a truck, a video shows.

The video, by YouTuber RealRusty, also seems to show the carriage being identified as a car and a human.

It's unclear whether Autopilot's designers have accounted for historic forms of transport.

NEW LOOK Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Advertisement

A video posted by a Tesla driver appears to show his car's Autopilot system confusing a horse-drawn carriage for a truck.

The video, posted by Swiss YouTuber RealRusty, shows his Tesla approaching a horse-drawn carriage on a highway outside Zurich, Switzerland, before it's misidentified as several other modes of transport.

The system appears to briefly identify the carriage as a car, a human, a human walking behind a car, a human walking behind a truck, and as a truck on its own.

This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? Log in .