The COMPAS tool is widely used to assess a defendant’s risk of committing more crimes, but a new study puts its usefulness into perspective.

In February 2013, Eric Loomis was found driving a car that had been used in a shooting. He was arrested, and pleaded guilty to eluding an officer. In determining his sentence, a judge looked not just to his criminal record, but also to a score assigned by a tool called COMPAS.

Developed by a private company called Equivant (formerly Northpointe), COMPAS—or the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions—purports to predict a defendant’s risk of committing another crime. It works through a proprietary algorithm that considers some of the answers to a 137-item questionnaire.

COMPAS is one of several such risk-assessment algorithms being used around the country to predict hot spots of violent crime, determine the types of supervision that inmates might need, or—as in Loomis’s case—provide information that might be useful in sentencing. COMPAS classified him as high-risk of re-offending, and Loomis was sentenced to six years.

He appealed the ruling on the grounds that the judge, in considering the outcome of an algorithm whose inner workings were secretive and could not be examined, violated due process. The appeal went up to the Wisconsin Supreme Court, who ruled against Loomis, noting that the sentence would have been the same had COMPAS never been consulted. Their ruling, however, urged caution and skepticism in the algorithm’s use.

Caution is indeed warranted, according to Julia Dressel and Hany Farid from Dartmouth College. In a new study, they have shown that COMPAS is no better at predicting an individual’s risk of recidivism than random volunteers recruited from the internet.

“Imagine you’re a judge and your court has purchased this software; the people behind it say they have big data and algorithms, and their software says the defendant is high-risk,” says Farid. “Now imagine I said: Hey, I asked 20 random people online if this person will recidivate and they said yes. How would you weight those two pieces of data? I bet you’d weight them differently. But what we’ve shown should give the courts some pause.” (A spokesperson from Equivant declined a request for an interview.)

COMPAS has attracted controversy before. In 2016, the technology reporter Julia Angwin and colleagues at ProPublica analyzed COMPAS assessments for more than 7,000 arrestees in Broward County, Florida, and published an investigation claiming that the algorithm was biased against African Americans. The problems, they said, lay in the algorithm’s mistakes. “Blacks are almost twice as likely as whites to be labeled a higher risk but not actually re-offend,” the team wrote. And COMPAS “makes the opposite mistake among whites: They are much more likely than blacks to be labeled lower-risk but go on to commit other crimes.”

Northpointe questioned ProPublica’s analysis, as did various academics. They noted, among other rebuttals, that the program correctly predicted recidivism in both white and black defendants at similar rates. For any given score on COMPAS’s 10-point scale, white and black people are just as likely to re-offend as each other. Others have noted that this debate hinges on one’s definition of fairness, and that it’s mathematically impossible to satisfy the standards set by both Northpointe and ProPublica—a story at The Washington Post clearly explains why.

The debate continues, but when Dressel read about it, she realized that it masked a different problem. “There was this underlying assumption in the conversation that the algorithm’s predictions were inherently better than human ones,” she says, “but I couldn’t find any research proving that.” So she and Farid did their own.

They recruited 400 volunteers through a crowdsourcing site. Each person saw short descriptions of defendants from ProPublica’s investigation, highlighting seven pieces of information. Based on that, they had to guess if the defendant would commit another crime within two years.

On average, they got the right answer 63 percent of their time, and the group’s accuracy rose to 67 percent if their answers were pooled. COMPAS, by contrast, has an accuracy of 65 percent. It’s barely better than individual guessers, and no better than a crowd. “These are nonexperts, responding to an online survey with a fraction of the amount of information that the software has,” says Farid. “So what exactly is software like COMPAS doing?”

Only Equivant can say, and they’re not revealing the secrets of their algorithm. So the duo developed their own algorithm, and made it as simple as possible—“the kind of thing you teach undergrads in a machine-learning course,” says Farid. They found that this training-wheels algorithm could perform just as well as COMPAS, with an accuracy of 67 percent, even when using just two pieces of data—a defendant’s age, and their number of previous convictions. “If you are young and have a lot of prior convictions, you are high-risk,” says Farid. “It’s kind of obvious.”

Other teams have found similar results. Last year, a team of researchers led by Cynthia Rudin from Duke University showed that a basic set of rules based on a person’s age, sex, and prior convictions—essentially, an algorithm so simple you could write it on a business card—could predict recidivism as well as COMPAS.

The problem isn’t necessarily that COMPAS is unsophisticated, says Farid, but that it has hit a ceiling in sophistication. When he and Dressel designed more complicated algorithms, they never improved on the bare-bones version that used just age and prior convictions. “It suggests not that the algorithms aren’t sophisticated enough, but that there’s no signal,” he says. Maybe this is just as good as it gets. Maybe the whole concept of predicting recidivism is going to stall at odds that are not that much better than a coin toss.

Sharad Goel, from Stanford University, sees it a little differently. He notes that judges in the real world have access to far more information than the volunteers in Dressel and Farid’s study, including witness testimonies, statements from attorneys, and more. Paradoxically, that informational overload can lead to worse results by allowing human biases to kick in. Simple sets of rules can often lead to better risk assessments—something that Goel found in his own work. Hence the reasonable accuracy of Dressel and Farid’s volunteers, based on just seven pieces of information.

“That finding should not be interpreted as meaning that risk-assessment tools add no value,” says Goel. Instead, the message is “when you tell people to focus on the right things, even nonexperts can compete with machine-learning algorithms.”

Equivant make a similar point in a response to Dressel and Farid’s study, published on Wednesday. “The findings of ‘virtually equal predictive accuracy’ in this study,” the statement says, “instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment, actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice.”

There have been several studies showing that algorithms can be used to positive effect in the criminal-justice system. “We’re not saying you shouldn’t use them,” says Farid. “We’re saying you should understand them. You shouldn’t need people like us to say: This doesn’t work. You should have to prove that something works before hinging people’s lives on it.”

“Before we even get to fairness, we need to make sure that these tools are accurate to begin with,” adds Dressel. “If not, then they’re not fair to anyone.”. Predicting the future is not only the provenance of fortune tellers or media pundits. Predictive algorithms, based on extensive datasets and statistics have overtaken wholesale and retail operations as any online shopper knows. And in the last few years algorithms, are used to automate decision making for bank loans, school admissions, hiring and infamously in predicting recidivism – the probability that a defendant will commit another crime in the next two years.

COMPAS, which stands for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions, is such a program and was singled out by ProPublica earlier this year as being racially biased. COMPAS utilizes 137 variables in its proprietary and unpublished scoring algorithm; race is not one of those variables. ProPublica used a dataset of defendants in Broward County, Florida. The data included demographics, criminal history, a COMPAS score [1] and the criminal actions in the subsequent two years. ProPublica then crosslinked this data with the defendants’ race. Their findings are generally accepted by all sides

COMPAS is moderately accurate in identifying white and black recidivism about 60% of the time.

COMPAS’s errors reflect apparent racial bias. Blacks are more often wrongly identified as recidivist risks (statistically a false positive) and whites more often erroneously identified as not being a risk (a false negative).

The “penalty” for being misclassified as a higher risk is more likely to be stiffer punishment. Being misclassified as a lower risk is like a “Get out of jail” card.

As you might anticipate, significant controversy followed couched mostly in an academic fight over which statistical measures or calculations more accurately depicted the bias. A study in Science Advances revisits the discussion and comes to a different conclusion.

The study

In the current study, assessment by humans was compared to that of COMPAS using that Broward County dataset. The humans were found on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [2], paid a dollar to participate and a $5 bonus if they were accurate more than 60% of the time.

Humans were just as accurate as the algorithm (62 vs. 65%)

The errors by the algorithm and humans were identical, overpredicting (false positives) recidivism for black defendants and underpredicting (false negatives) for white defendants.

Humans COMPAS Black % White % Black % White % Accuracy* 68.2 67.6 64.9 65.7 False Positives 37.1 27.2 40.4 25.4 False Negatives 29.2 40.3 30.9 47.9

* Accuracy is the sum of true positives and true negatives statistically speaking

The human assessors used only seven variables, not the 137 of COMPAS. [3] This suggests that the algorithm was needlessly complex at least in deciding recidivism risk. In fact, the researchers found that just two variables, defendant age, and the number of prior convictions was as accurate as COMPAS’s predictions.

Of more significant interest is the finding that when human assessors were given the additional information regarding defendant race it had no impact. They were just as accurate and demonstrated the same racial disparity in false positives and negatives. Race was an associated confounder, but it was not the cause of the statistical difference. ProPublica’s narrative of racial bias was incorrect.

Algorithms are statistical models involving choices. If you optimize to find all the true positives, your false positives will increase. Lower your false positive rate and the false negatives increase. Do we want to incarcerate more or less? The MIT Technology Review puts it this way.

“Are we primarily interested in taking as few chances as possible that someone will skip bail or re-offend? What trade-offs should we make to ensure justice and lower the massive social costs of imprisonment?”

COMPAS is meant to serve as a decision aid. The purpose of the 137 variables is to create a variety of scales depicting substance abuse, environment, criminal opportunity, associates, etc. Its role is to assist the humans of our justice system in determining an appropriate punishment. [4] None of the studies, to my knowledge, looked at the sentences handed down. The current research ends as follows:

“When considering using software such as COMPAS in making decisions that will significantly affect the lives and well-being of criminal defendants, it is valuable to ask whether we would put these decisions in the hands of random people who respond to an online survey because, in the end, the results from these two approaches appear to be indistinguishable.”

The answer is no. COMPAS and similar algorithms are tools, not a replacement FOR human judgment. They facilitate but do not automate. ProPublica is correct when saying algorithmic decisions need to be understood by their human users and require continuous validation and refinement. But ProPublica’s narrative, that evil forces were responsible for a racially biased algorithm are not true.

[1] COMPAS is scored on a 1 to 10 scale, with scores greater than 8 being at high risk for repeat offenders

[2] Amazon's Mechanical Turk is a crowd-sourced marketplace for human assistance. In this case for people to participate in a survey.

[3] The variables were gender, age, criminal charge, misdemeanor or felony, prior adult convictions and prior juvenile felony and misdemeanor charges.

[4] As the COMPAS manual states: “Criminal justice agencies across the nation use COMPAS to inform decisions regarding the placement, supervision and case management of offenders.” [Emphasis added]

Source: The accuracy, fairness and limits of predicting recidivism Science Advances 2018. ← Read the story

Across the nation, judges, probation and parole officers are increasingly using algorithms to assess a criminal defendant’s likelihood of becoming a recidivist – a term used to describe criminals who re-offend. There are dozens of these risk assessment algorithms in use. Many states have built their own assessments, and several academics have written tools. There are also two leading nationwide tools offered by commercial vendors.

We set out to assess one of the commercial tools made by Northpointe, Inc. to discover the underlying accuracy of their recidivism algorithm and to test whether the algorithm was biased against certain groups.

Our analysis of Northpointe’s tool, called COMPAS (which stands for Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions), found that black defendants were far more likely than white defendants to be incorrectly judged to be at a higher risk of recidivism, while white defendants were more likely than black defendants to be incorrectly flagged as low risk.

We looked at more than 10,000 criminal defendants in Broward County, Florida, and compared their predicted recidivism rates with the rate that actually occurred over a two-year period. When most defendants are booked in jail, they respond to a COMPAS questionnaire. Their answers are fed into the COMPAS software to generate several scores including predictions of “Risk of Recidivism” and “Risk of Violent Recidivism.”

We compared the recidivism risk categories predicted by the COMPAS tool to the actual recidivism rates of defendants in the two years after they were scored, and found that the score correctly predicted an offender’s recidivism 61 percent of the time, but was only correct in its predictions of violent recidivism 20 percent of the time.

In forecasting who would re-offend, the algorithm correctly predicted recidivism for black and white defendants at roughly the same rate (59 percent for white defendants, and 63 percent for black defendants) but made mistakes in very different ways. It misclassifies the white and black defendants differently when examined over a two-year follow-up period.

Our analysis found that:

Black defendants were often predicted to be at a higher risk of recidivism than they actually were. Our analysis found that black defendants who did not recidivate over a two-year period were nearly twice as likely to be misclassified as higher risk compared to their white counterparts (45 percent vs. 23 percent).

White defendants were often predicted to be less risky than they were. Our analysis found that white defendants who re-offended within the next two years were mistakenly labeled low risk almost twice as often as black re-offenders (48 percent vs. 28 percent).

The analysis also showed that even when controlling for prior crimes, future recidivism, age, and gender, black defendants were 45 percent more likely to be assigned higher risk scores than white defendants.

Black defendants were also twice as likely as white defendants to be misclassified as being a higher risk of violent recidivism. And white violent recidivists were 63 percent more likely to have been misclassified as a low risk of violent recidivism, compared with black violent recidivists.

The violent recidivism analysis also showed that even when controlling for prior crimes, future recidivism, age, and gender, black defendants were 77 percent more likely to be assigned higher risk scores than white defendants.

Previous Work

In 2013, researchers Sarah Desmarais and Jay Singh examined 19 different recidivism risk methodologies being used in the United States and found that “in most cases, validity had only been examined in one or two studies conducted in the United States, and frequently, those investigations were completed by the same people who developed the instrument.”

Their analysis of the research published before March2013 found that the tools “were moderate at best in terms of predictive validity,” Desmarais said in an interview. And she could not find any substantial set of studies conducted in the United States that examined whether risk scores were racially biased. “The data do not exist,” she said.

The largest examination of racial bias in U.S. risk assessment algorithms since then is a 2016 paper by Jennifer Skeem at University of California, Berkeley and Christopher T. Lowenkamp from the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts. They examined data about 34,000 federal offenders to test the predictive validity of the Post Conviction Risk Assessment tool that was developed by the federal courts to help probation and parole officers determine the level of supervision required for an inmate upon release.

The authors found that the average risk score for black offenders was higher than for white offenders, but that concluded the differences were not attributable to bias.

A 2013 study analyzed the predictive validity among various races for another score called the Level of Service Inventory, one of the most popular commercial risk scores from Multi-Health Systems. That study found that “ethnic minorities have higher LS scores than nonminorities.” The study authors, who are Canadian, noted that racial disparities were more consistently found in the U.S. than in Canada. “One possibility may be that systematic bias within the justice system may distort the measurement of ‘true’ recidivism,” they wrote.

A smaller 2006 study of 532 male residents of a work-release program also found “a tendency toward classification errors for African Americans” in the Level of Service Inventory-Revised. The study, by Kevin Whiteacre of the Salvation Army Correctional Services Program, found that 42.7 percent of African Americans were incorrectly classified as high risk, compared with 27.7 percent of Caucasians and 25 percent of Hispanics. That study urged correctional facilities to investigate the their use of the scores independently using a simple contingency table approach that we follow later in this study.

As risk scores move further into the mainstream of the criminal justice system, policy makers have called for further studies of whether the scores are biased.

When he was U.S. Attorney General, Eric Holder asked the U.S. Sentencing Commission to study potential bias in the tests used at sentencing. “Although these measures were crafted with the best of intentions, I am concerned that they inadvertently undermine our efforts to ensure individualized and equal justice,” he said, adding, “they may exacerbate unwarranted and unjust disparities that are already far too common in our criminal justice system and in our society.” The sentencing commission says it is not currently conducting an analysis of bias in risk assessments.

So ProPublica did its own analysis.

How We Acquired the Data

We chose to examine the COMPAS algorithm because it is one of the most popular scores used nationwide and is increasingly being used in pretrial and sentencing, the so-called “front-end” of the criminal justice system. We chose Broward County because it is a large jurisdiction using the COMPAS tool in pretrial release decisions and Florida has strong open-records laws.

Through a public records request, ProPublica obtained two years worth of COMPAS scores from the Broward County Sheriff’s Office in Florida. We received data for all 18,610 people who were scored in 2013 and 2014.

Because Broward County primarily uses the score to determine whether to release or detain a defendant before his or her trial, we discarded scores that were assessed at parole, probation or other stages in the criminal justice system. That left us with 11,757 people who were assessed at the pretrial stage.

Each pretrial defendant received at least three COMPAS scores: “Risk of Recidivism,” “Risk of Violence” and “Risk of Failure to Appear.”

COMPAS scores for each defendant ranged from 1 to 10, with ten being the highest risk. Scores 1 to 4 were labeled by COMPAS as “Low”; 5 to 7 were labeled “Medium”; and 8 to 10 were labeled “High.”

Starting with the database of COMPAS scores, we built a profile of each person’s criminal history, both before and after they were scored. We collected public criminal records from the Broward County Clerk’s Office website through April 1, 2016. On average, defendants in our dataset were not incarcerated for 622.87 days (sd: 329.19).

We matched the criminal records to the COMPAS records using a person’s first and last names and date of birth. This is the same technique used in the Broward County COMPAS validation study conducted by researchers at Florida State University in 2010. We downloaded around 80,000 criminal records from the Broward County Clerk’s Office website.

To determine race, we used the race classifications used by the Broward County Sheriff’s Office, which identifies defendants as black, white, Hispanic, Asian and Native American. In 343 cases, the race was marked as Other.

We also compiled each person’s record of incarceration. We received jail records from the Broward County Sheriff’s Office from January 2013 to April 2016, and we downloaded public incarceration records from the Florida Department of Corrections website.

We found that sometimes people’s names or dates of birth were incorrectly entered in some records – which led to incorrect matches between an individual’s COMPAS score and his or her criminal records. We attempted to determine how many records were affected. In a random sample of 400 cases, we found an error rate of 3.75 percent (CI: +/- 1.8 percent).

How We Defined Recidivism

Defining recidivism was key to our analysis.

In a 2009 study examining the predictive power of its COMPAS score, Northpointe defined recidivism as “a finger-printable arrest involving a charge and a filing for any uniform crime reporting (UCR) code.” We interpreted that to mean a criminal offense that resulted in a jail booking and took place after the crime for which the person was COMPAS scored.

It was not always clear, however, which criminal case was associated with an individual’s COMPAS score. To match COMPAS scores with accompanying cases, we considered cases with arrest dates or charge dates within 30 days of a COMPAS assessment being conducted. In some instances, we could not find any corresponding charges to COMPAS scores. We removed those cases from our analysis.

Next, we sought to determine if a person had been charged with a new crime subsequent to crime for which they were COMPAS screened. We did not count traffic tickets and some municipal ordinance violations as recidivism. We did not count as recidivists people who were arrested for failing to appear at their court hearings, or people who were later charged with a crime that occurred prior to their COMPAS screening.

For violent recidivism, we used the FBI’s definition of violent crime, a category that includes murder, manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery and aggravated assault.

For most of our analysis, we defined recidivism as a new arrest within two years. We based this decision on Northpointe’s practitioners guide, which says that its recidivism score is meant to predict “a new misdemeanor or felony offense within two years of the COMPAS administration date.”

In addition, a recent study of 25,000 federal prisoners’ recidivism rates by the U.S. Sentencing Commission, which shows that most recidivists commit a new crime within the first two years after release (if they are going to commit a crime at all).

Analysis

We analyzed the COMPAS scores for “Risk of Recidivism” and “Risk of Violent Recidivism.” We did not analyze the COMPAS score for “Risk of Failure to Appear.”

We began by looking at the risk of recidivism score. Our initial analysis looked at the simple distribution of the COMPAS decile scores among whites and blacks. We plotted the distribution of these scores for 6,172 defendants who had not been arrested for a new offense or who had recidivated within two years.

These histograms show that scores for white defendants were skewed toward lower-risk categories, while black defendants were evenly distributed across scores. In our two-year sample, there were 3,175 black defendants and 2,103 white defendants, with 1,175 female defendants and 4,997 male defendants. There were 2,809 defendants who recidivated within two years in this sample.

The histograms for COMPAS’s violent risk score also show a disparity in score distribution between white and black defendants. The sample we used to test COMPAS’s violent recidivism score was slightly smaller than for the general recidivism score: 4,020 defendants, 1,918 black defendants and 1,459 white defendants. There were 652 violent recidivists.

While there is a clear difference between the distributions of COMPAS scores for white and black defendants, merely looking at the distributions does not account for other demographic and behavioral factors.

To test racial disparities in the score controlling for other factors, we created a logistic regression model that considered race, age, criminal history, future recidivism, charge degree, gender and age.

Risk of General Recidivism Logistic Model Dependent variable: Score (Low vs Medium and High) Female 0.221*** (0.080) Age: Greater than 45 -1.356*** (0.099) Age: Less than 25 1.308*** (0.076) Black 0.477*** (0.069) Asian -0.254 (0.478) Hispanic -0.428*** (0.128) Native American 1.394* (0.766) Other -0.826*** (0.162) Number of Priors 0.269*** (0.011) Misdemeanor -0.311*** (0.067) Two year Recidivism 0.686*** (0.064) Constant -1.526*** (0.079) Observations 6,172 Akaike Inf. Crit. 6,192.402 Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We used those factors to model the odds of getting a higher COMPAS score. According to Northpointe’s practitioners guide, COMPAS “scores in the medium and high range garner more interest from supervision agencies than low scores, as a low score would suggest there is little risk of general recidivism,” so we considered scores any higher than “low” to indicate a risk of recidivism.

Our logistic model found that the most predictive factor of a higher risk score was age. Defendants younger than 25 years old were 2.5 times as likely to get a higher score than middle aged offenders, even when controlling for prior crimes, future criminality, race and gender.

Race was also quite predictive of a higher score. While Black defendants had higher recidivism rates overall, when adjusted for this difference and other factors, they were 45 percent more likely to get a higher score than whites.

Surprisingly, given their lower levels of criminality overall, female defendants were 19.4 percent more likely to get a higher score than men, controlling for the same factors.

Risk of Violent Recidivism Logistic Model Dependent variable: Score (Low vs Medium and High) Female -0.729*** (0.127) Age: Greater than 45 -1.742*** (0.184) Age: Less than 25 3.146*** (0.115) Black 0.659*** (0.108) Asian -0.985 (0.705) Hispanic -0.064 (0.191) Native American 0.448 (1.035) Other -0.205 (0.225) Number of Priors 0.138*** (0.012) Misdemeanor -0.164* (0.098) Two Year Recidivism 0.934*** (0.115) Constant -2.243*** (0.113) Observations 4,020 Akaike Inf. Crit. 3,022.779 Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

The COMPAS software also has a score for risk of violent recidivism. We analyzed 4,020 people who were scored for violent recidivism over a period of two years (not including time spent incarcerated). We ran a similar regression model for these scores.

Age was an even stronger predictor of a higher score for violent recidivism. Our regression showed that young defendants were 6.4 times more likely to get a higher score than middle age defendants, when correcting for criminal history, gender, race and future violent recidivism.

Race was also predictive of a higher score for violent recidivism. Black defendants were 77.3 percent more likely than white defendants to receive a higher score, correcting for criminal history and future violent recidivism.

To test COMPAS’s overall predictive accuracy, we fit a Cox proportional hazards model to the data – the same technique that Northpointe used in its own validation study. A Cox model allows us to compare rates of recidivism while controlling for time. Because we aren’t controlling for other factors such as a defendant’s criminality we can include more people in this Cox model. For this analysis our sample size was 10,314 defendants (3,569 white defendants and 5,147 black defendants).

Risk of General Recidivism Cox Model High Risk 1.250*** (0.041) Medium Risk 0.796*** (0.041) Observations 13,344 R2 0.068 Max. Possible R2 0.990 Wald Test 954.820*** (df = 2) LR Test 942.824*** (df = 2) Score (Logrank) Test 1,054.767*** (df = 2) Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We considered people in our data set to be “at risk” from the day they were given the COMPAS score until the day they committed a new offense or April 1, 2016, whichever came first. We removed people from the risk set while they were incarcerated. The independent variable in the Cox model was the COMPAS categorical risk score.

The Cox model showed that people with high scores were 3.5 times as likely to recidivate as people in the low (scores 1 to 4) category. Northpointe’s study, found that people with high scores (scores 8 to 10) were 5.6 times as likely to recidivate. Both results indicate that the score has predictive value.

A Kaplan Meier survival plot also shows a clear difference in recidivism rates between each COMPAS score level.

Overall, the Cox regression had a concordance score of 63.6 percent. That means for any randomly selected pair of defendants in the sample, the COMPAS system can accurately rank their recidivism risk 63.6 percent of the time (e.g. if one person of the pair recidivates, that pair will count as a successful match if that person also had a higher score). In its study, Northpointe reported a slightly higher concordance: 68 percent.

Running the Cox model on the underlying risk scores - ranked 1 to 10 - rather than the low, medium and high intervals yielded a slightly higher concordance of 66.4 percent.

Both results are lower than what Northpointe describes as a threshold for reliability. “A rule of thumb according to several recent articles is that AUCs of .70 or above typically indicate satisfactory predictive accuracy, and measures between .60 and .70 suggest low to moderate predictive accuracy,” the company says in its study.

The COMPAS violent recidivism score had a concordance of 65.1 percent.

The COMPAS system unevenly predicts recidivism between genders. According to Kaplan-Meier estimates, women rated high risk recidivated at a 47.5 percent rate during two years after they were scored. But men rated high risk recidivated at a much higher rate – 61.2 percent – over the same time period. This means that a high-risk woman has a much lower risk of recidivating than a high-risk man, a fact that may be overlooked by law enforcement officials interpreting the score.

Northpointe does offer a custom test for women, but it is not in use in Broward County.

The predictive accuracy of the COMPAS recidivism score was consistent between races in our study – 62.5 percent for white defendants vs. 62.3 percent for black defendants. The authors of the Northpointe study found a small difference in the concordance scores by race: 69 percent for white defendants and 67 percent for black defendants.

Across every risk category, black defendants recidivated at higher rates.

Risk of General Recidivism Cox Model (with Interaction Term) Black 0.279*** (0.061) Asian -0.777 (0.502) Hispanic -0.064 (0.097) Native American -1.255 (1.001) Other 0.014 (0.110) High Score 1.284*** (0.084) Medium Score 0.843*** (0.071) Black:High -0.190* (.100, p: 0.0574) Asian:High 1.316* (0.768) Hispanic:High -0.119 (0.198) Native American:High 1.956* (.083) Other:High 0.415 (0.259) Black:Medium -0.173* (.091, p: 0.0578) Asian:Medium 0.986 (0.711) Hispanic:Medium 0.065 (0.164) Native American:Medium 1.390 (1.120) Other:Medium -0.334 (0.232) Observations 13,344 R2 0.072 Max. Possible R2 0.990 Log Likelihood -30,280.410 Wald Test 988.830*** (df = 17) LR Test 993.709*** (df = 17) Score (Logrank) Test 1,104.894*** (df = 17) Note: *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

We also added a race-by-score interaction term to the Cox model. This term allowed us to consider whether the difference in recidivism between a high score and low score was different for black defendants and white defendants.

The coefficient on high scores for black defendants is almost statistically significant (0.0574). High-risk white defendants are 3.61 times as likely to recidivate as low-risk white defendants, while high-risk black defendants are only 2.99 times as likely to recidivate as low-risk black defendants. The hazard ratios for medium-risk defendants vs. low risk defendants also are different across races: 2.32 for white defendants and 1.95 for black defendants. Because of the gap in hazard ratios, we can conclude that the score is performing differently among racial subgroups.

We ran a similar analysis on COMPAS’s violent recidivism score, however we did not find a similar result. Here, we found that the interaction term on race and score was not significant, meaning that there is no significant difference the hazards of high and low risk black defendants and high and low risk white defendants.

Overall, there are far fewer violent recidivists than general recidivists and there isn’t a clear difference in the hazard rates across score levels for black and white recidivists. These Kaplan Meier plots show very low rates of violent recidivism.

Finally, we investigated whether certain types of errors – false positives and false negatives – were unevenly distributed among races. We used contingency tables to determine those relative rates following the analysis outlined in the 2006 paper from the Salvation Army.

We removed people from our data set for whom we had less than two years of recidivism information. The remaining population was 7,214 – slightly larger than the sample in the logistic models above, because we don’t need a defendant’s case information for this analysis. As in the logistic regression analysis, we marked scores other than “low” as higher risk. The following tables show how the COMPAS recidivism score performed:

All Defendants Low High Survived 2681 1282 Recidivated 1216 2035 FP rate: 32.35 FN rate: 37.40 PPV: 0.61 NPV: 0.69 LR+: 1.94 LR-: 0.55 Black Defendants Low High Survived 990 805 Recidivated 532 1369 FP rate: 44.85 FN rate: 27.99 PPV: 0.63 NPV: 0.65 LR+: 1.61 LR-: 0.51 White Defendants Low High Survived 1139 349 Recidivated 461 505 FP rate: 23.45 FN rate: 47.72 PPV: 0.59 NPV: 0.71 LR+: 2.23 LR-: 0.62

These contingency tables reveal that the algorithm is more likely to misclassify a black defendant as higher risk than a white defendant. Black defendants who do not recidivate were nearly twice as likely to be classified by COMPAS as higher risk compared to their white counterparts (45 percent vs. 23 percent). However, black defendants who scored higher did recidivate slightly more often than white defendants (63 percent vs. 59 percent).

The test tended to make the opposite mistake with whites, meaning that it was more likely to wrongly predict that white people would not commit additional crimes if released compared to black defendants. COMPAS under-classified white reoffenders as low risk 70.5 percent more often than black reoffenders (48 percent vs. 28 percent). The likelihood ratio for white defendants was slightly higher 2.23 than for black defendants 1.61.

We also tested whether restricting our definition of high risk to include only COMPAS’s high score, rather than including both medium and high scores, changed the results of our analysis. In that scenario, black defendants were three times as likely as white defendants to be falsely rated at high risk (16 percent vs. 5 percent).

We found similar results for the COMPAS violent recidivism score. As before, we calculated contingency tables based on how the score performed:

All Defendants Low High Survived 4121 1597 Recidivated 347 389 FP rate: 27.93 FN rate: 47.15 PPV: 0.20 NPV: 0.92 LR+: 1.89 LR-: 0.65 Black defendants Low High Survived 1692 1043 Recidivated 170 273 FP rate: 38.14 FN rate: 38.37 PPV: 0.21 NPV: 0.91 LR+: 1.62 LR-: 0.62 White defendants Low High Survived 1679 380 Recidivated 129 77 FP rate: 18.46 FN rate: 62.62 PPV: 0.17 NPV: 0.93 LR+: 2.03 LR-: 0.77

Black defendants were twice as likely as white defendants to be misclassified as a higher risk of violent recidivism, and white recidivists were misclassified as low risk 63.2 percent more often than black defendants. Black defendants who were classified as a higher risk of violent recidivism did recidivate at a slightly higher rate than white defendants (21 percent vs. 17 percent), and the likelihood ratio for white defendants was higher, 2.03, than for black defendants, 1.62.

We’ve published the calculations and data for this analysis on github.

← Read the story. If used properly, criminal-justice algorithms offer “the chance of a generation, and perhaps a lifetime, to reform sentencing and unwind mass incarceration in a scientific way.”

Imagine you are designing a system to predict which criminals will reoffend. One option is to optimize for “true positives,” meaning that you will identify as many people as possible who are at high risk of committing another crime. One problem with this approach is that it tends to increase the number of false positives: people who will be unjustly classified as likely reoffenders. The dial can be adjusted to deliver as few false positives as possible, but that tends to create more false negatives: likely reoffenders who slip through and get a more lenient treatment than warranted.

Raising the incidence of true positives or lowering the false positives are both ways to improve a statistical measure known as positive predictive value, or PPV. That is the percentage of all positives that are true.

As Gummadi points out, ProPublica compared false positive rates and false negative rates for blacks and whites and found them to be skewed in favor of whites. Northpointe, in contrast, compared the PPVs for different races and found them to be similar. In part because the recidivism rates for blacks and whites do in fact differ, it is mathematically likely that the positive predictive values for people in each group will be similar while the rates of false negatives are not.

One thing this tells us is that the broader society—lawmakers, the courts, an informed public—should decide what we want such algorithms to prioritize. Are we primarily interested in taking as few chances as possible that someone will skip bail or reoffend? What trade-offs should we make to ensure justice and lower the massive social costs of imprisonment?

No matter which way the dials are set, any algorithm will have biases—it is, after all, making a prediction based on generalized statistics, not on someone’s individual situation. But we can still use such systems to guide decisions that are wiser and fairer than the ones humans tend to make on their own.

The controversy surrounding the New York Police Department’s stop-and-frisk practices helps to show why. Between January 2004 and June 2012, New York City police conducted 4.4 million stops under a program that allowed officers to temporarily detain, question, and search people on the street for weapons and other contraband. But in fact, “88 percent of the 4.4 million stops resulted in no further action—meaning a vast majority of those stopped were doing nothing wrong,” the New York Times said in an editorial decrying the practice. What’s more: “In about 83 percent of cases, the person stopped was black or Hispanic, even though the two groups accounted for just over half the population.” This example of human bias, illuminated through data analysis, is a reminder that ADM systems could play a positive role in criminal justice. Used properly, they offer “the chance of a generation, and perhaps a lifetime, to reform sentencing and unwind mass incarceration in a scientific way,” according to Anthony Flores, Christopher Lowenkamp, and Kristin Bechtel, three researchers who found flaws in the methodology that ProPublica used to analyze COMPAS. The authors worry that this opportunity “is slipping away because of misinformation ­​and misunderstanding” about the technology.

But if we accept that algorithms might make life fairer if they are well designed, how can we know whether they are so designed?

Democratic societies should be working now to determine how much transparency they expect from ADM systems. Do we need new regulations of the software to ensure it can be properly inspected? Lawmakers, judges, and the public should have a say in which measures of fairness get prioritized by algorithms. But if the algorithms don’t actually reflect these value judgments, who will be held accountable?

These are the hard questions we need to answer if we expect to benefit from advances in algorithmic technology.

Matthias Spielkamp is executive director of AlgorithmWatch, an advocacy group that analyzes the risks and opportunities of automated decision making.. Algorithms that assess people’s likelihood to reoffend as part of the bail-setting process in criminal cases are, to be frank, really scary. Algorithms that assess people’s likelihood to reoffend as part of the bail-setting process in criminal cases are, to be frank, really scary.

We don’t know very much about how they work—the companies that make them We don’t know very much about how they work—the companies that make them are intensely secretive about what makes their products tick—and studies have suggested that they can harbor racial prejudices. Yet, these algorithms provide judges with information that is used to decide the course of somebody’s life.

Advertisement

Now, a Now, a new study published on Wednesday in Science Advances from Dartmouth College computer science professor Hany Farid and former student Julia Dressel claims to “cast significant doubt on the entire effort of algorithmic recidivism prediction,” the authors write. In short, bail algorithms don’t appear to perform any better than human beings.

Read More: AI Could Resurrect a Racist Housing Policy

According to their study, COMPAS—one of the most popular algorithms used by courts in the US According to their study, COMPAS—one of the most popular algorithms used by courts in the US and elsewhere to predict recidivism—is no more accurate than 20 people asked to estimate the likelihood of recidivism in an online survey. Additionally, COMPAS didn’t outperform a simple linear predictor algorithm armed with just two inputs: age and number of crimes committed. COMPAS, in contrast, uses 137 unique inputs to make decisions , the study's authors write.

In In a statement released after the study was published , Equivant—the company behind COMPAS—argued that COMPAS in fact only uses six inputs, and that the rest are "needs factors that are NOT used as predictors in the COMPAS risk assessment." In response, the authors wrote to me in an email that "regardless how many features are used by COMPAS, the fact is that a simple predictor with only two features and people responding to an online survey are as accurate as COMPAS."

“Our point isn’t that it's good or bad,” said co-author Farid over the phone. “But we would like the courts to understand that the weight they give these risk assessments should be based on an understanding that the accuracy from this commercial black box software is exactly the same as asking a bunch of people to respond to an online survey.” “Our point isn’t that it's good or bad,” said co-author Farid over the phone. “But we would like the courts to understand that the weight they give these risk assessments should be based on an understanding that the accuracy from this commercial black box software is exactly the same as asking a bunch of people to respond to an online survey.”

Advertisement

The baseline accuracy of online respondents estimating recidivism within two years was 63 percent, the authors report, while COMPAS’ is 65 percent (a finding based on a dataset covering its use in Broward County, Florida, between 2013 and 2014). The simple linear algorithm with just two inputs had an accuracy of 66 percent. It’s worth noting that many researchers prefer to gauge accuracy with a different statistical measure The baseline accuracy of online respondents estimating recidivism within two years was 63 percent, the authors report, while COMPAS’ is 65 percent (a finding based on a dataset covering its use in Broward County, Florida, between 2013 and 2014). The simple linear algorithm with just two inputs had an accuracy of 66 percent. It’s worth noting that many researchers prefer to gauge accuracy with a different statistical measure known as AUC-ROC —even using this measure, though, online survey respondents managed an AUC-ROC value of .71, while COMPAS achieves .70.

"The findings of 'virtually equal predictive accuracy' in this study, instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment," Equivant wrote in an online statement, "actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice." "The findings of 'virtually equal predictive accuracy' in this study, instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment," Equivant wrote in an online statement, "actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice."

In response, the authors wrote me that .70 AUC is indeed the industry standard, but noted that their study participants nonetheless managed .71. "Therefore, regardless of the preferred measure of predictive performance, COMPAS and the human participants are indistinguishable," they wrote. In response, the authors wrote me that .70 AUC is indeed the industry standard, but noted that their study participants nonetheless managed .71. "Therefore, regardless of the preferred measure of predictive performance, COMPAS and the human participants are indistinguishable," they wrote.

According to the study’s authors, their work suggests a cap on the accuracy of predictions about people’s futures based on historical data, whether the predictions are made by people or machines. Indeed, the whole idea of predicting someone’s behaviour two years from the present may be wrongheaded, Fahid said. Regardless, the overall point is these automated techniques are not any better than humans. According to the study’s authors, their work suggests a cap on the accuracy of predictions about people’s futures based on historical data, whether the predictions are made by people or machines. Indeed, the whole idea of predicting someone’s behaviour two years from the present may be wrongheaded, Fahid said. Regardless, the overall point is these automated techniques are not any better than humans.

Advertisement

A potential caveat, however: According to Sam Corbett-Davies—a Stanford PhD student who A potential caveat, however: According to Sam Corbett-Davies—a Stanford PhD student who has done research on the risks posed by bail algorithms —predictions based solely on select historical data (whether it’s done by algorithms or not) are often still more accurate than those that include more subjective factors like how a judge feels about tattoos.

"Judges are exposed to much more information: they can talk to defendants, assess their demeanor, see their tattoos, and ask about their upbringing or family life,” Corbett-Davies wrote me in an email. “All these extra factors are mostly useless, but they allow human biases to seep into judges' decisions. "Judges are exposed to much more information: they can talk to defendants, assess their demeanor, see their tattoos, and ask about their upbringing or family life,” Corbett-Davies wrote me in an email. “All these extra factors are mostly useless, but they allow human biases to seep into judges' decisions. Multiple studies have looked at thousands of judge decisions and found that algorithms based on very few factors can significantly outperform judges."

In other words, human "intuition" based on a grab bag of subjective factors may still be less accurate than algorithms (or even humans) just looking at select historical information about a person. In other words, human "intuition" based on a grab bag of subjective factors may still be less accurate than algorithms (or even humans) just looking at select historical information about a person.

Still, Fahid and Dressel’s findings are, at the very least, an indictment of how companies armed with flashy advertising and a staunch refusal to reveal their secret sauce have managed to flood the criminal justice system with algorithms that help to decide people’s futures without publicly vetted evidence of their accuracy. Still, Fahid and Dressel’s findings are, at the very least, an indictment of how companies armed with flashy advertising and a staunch refusal to reveal their secret sauce have managed to flood the criminal justice system with algorithms that help to decide people’s futures without publicly vetted evidence of their accuracy.

Indeed, study co-author Julia Dressel told me over the phone, the last published study that specifically compared the accuracy of algorithms versus that of humans in predicting recidivism (that they could find, anyway) was Indeed, study co-author Julia Dressel told me over the phone, the last published study that specifically compared the accuracy of algorithms versus that of humans in predicting recidivism (that they could find, anyway) was done in Canada in 1984 . A few things have changed since then.

“Companies should have to prove that these algorithms are actually accurate and effective,” Dressel told me over the phone. “I think the main step forward is recognizing that we need to be a bit wary of machine learning and artificial intelligence. And though these words sound impressive, and they can do really great things, we have to hold these technologies to a high standard.” “Companies should have to prove that these algorithms are actually accurate and effective,” Dressel told me over the phone. “I think the main step forward is recognizing that we need to be a bit wary of machine learning and artificial intelligence. And though these words sound impressive, and they can do really great things, we have to hold these technologies to a high standard.”

Get six of our favorite Motherboard stories every day by signing up for our newsletter .. Just like a professional chef or a heart surgeon, a machine learning algorithm is only as good as the training it receives. And as algorithms increasingly take the reigns and make decisions for humans, we’re finding out that a lot of them didn’t receive the finest education, as they mimic human race- and gender-based biases and even create new problems.

For these reasons, it’s particularly concerning that multiple states, including California, New York, and Wisconsin, use algorithms to predict which people will commit crimes again after they’ve been incarcerated. Even worse, it doesn’t even seem to work.

In a paper published Wednesday in the journal Science Advances, a pair of computer scientists at Dartmouth College found that a widely used computer program for predicting recidivism is no more accurate than completely untrained civilians. This program, called Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions, analyzes 137 different factors to determine how likely it is that a person will commit another crime after release. COMPAS considers factors like substance use, social isolation, and other elements that criminologists theorize can lead to recidivism, ranking people as high, medium, or low risk.

Machine learning algorithms that gauge incarcerated people's risk of recidivism are deeply flawed, say researchers. Flickr / Alexander C. Kafka

And sure, risk assessment sounds great. Why not have more data to help courts determine who is a greater risk? But what Dartmouth computer scientists Julia Dressel and Hany Farid found was that untrained individuals correctly judged recidivism risk with just about the same accuracy as COMPAS, suggesting that the supposed power of the algorithm isn’t actually there.

In one trial that included just a fraction of the information used by COMPAS (seven factors instead of 137, and excluding race), a group of human volunteers on the internet, with presumably no training in criminal risk assessment, evaluated case reports. They correctly estimated a person’s recidivism with 67 percent accuracy, compared to COMPAS’s 65 percent accuracy.

Take a moment to let that sink in. Untrained people on the web were slightly better at predicting whether a person would go back to jail than the tool that is literally designed to predict whether a person would go back to jail. And it gets worse. Once you add a defendant’s race, the volunteer’s false-positive and false-negative rates were within just a few percentage points of COMPAS’s. So not only is COMPAS not that great at predicting recidivism, it’s just as prone to racial bias as humans are. So much for the cold logic of computers.

The researchers found that humans were almost as good as the algorithm at predicting recidivism rates. They also found that humans and the algorithm had similar rates of false-positives and false-negatives when race is factored in. Carla Schaffer / AAAS

The researchers then made a linear model that matched COMPAS’s prediction rate with just two factors: age and number of previous convictions. Just to be clear, this prediction would also be unfair, but it demonstrates just how flawed COMPAS is.

And while this research is new, the big takeaways it espouses are not. In a 2016 investigation, ProPublica reporters found that not only is COMPAS unreliable, it’s actually systematically biased against African Americans, consistently rating black people as higher risk than whites who committed more serious crimes. Hopefully, this new research will help pave the way for juster risk assessment processes in the criminal justice system.

The fact that COMPAS is useless at best and deeply biased at worst suggests that computer-based risk assessments could be deepening the injustices that the justice system is supposed to address. Since risk assessment scores can be applied at any step of the criminal justice process, including while setting a person’s bond, determining whether they’re granted parole, and in some states, even for determining a person’s sentence, this research suggests a dire need to reexamine the use of COMPAS and other programs.. Although crime rates have fallen steadily since the 1990s, rates of recidivism remain a factor in the areas of both public safety and prisoner management. The National Institute of Justice defines recidivism as “criminal acts that resulted in rearrest, re-conviction or return to prison with or without a new sentence,” and with over 75 percent of released prisoners rearrested within five years, it’s apparent there’s room for improvement. In an effort to streamline sentencing, reduce recidivism and increase public safety, private companies have developed criminal justice algorithms for use in the courtroom. These tools — sometimes called “risk assessments” — aim to recommend sentence length and severity specific to each defendant based on a set of proprietary formulae. Unfortunately, the algorithms’ proprietary nature means that neither attorneys nor the general public have access to information necessary to understand or defend against these assessments.

There are dozens of these algorithms currently in use at federal and state levels across the nation. One of the most controversial, the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions or COMPAS, made headlines in 2016 when defendant Eric Loomis received a six-year sentence for reckless endangerment, eluding police, driving a car without the owner’s consent, possession of firearm, probation violation and resisting arrest — a sentence partially based on his COMPAS score. Loomis, a registered sex offender, challenged the verdict, claiming COMPAS violated his constitutional right of due process because he could not mount a proper challenge. His argument was two-fold: that the proprietary nature of the formula denied him and his defense team access to his data, and that COMPAS takes into account race and gender when predicting outcomes, which constitutes bias. His case was denied by the lower court, but Loomis refused to back down, instead appealing to the Wisconsin Supreme Court.

In July of 2016, a unanimous decision by the Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the state’s decision to use automated programs to determine sentencing. In her opinion, Justice Ann Walsh Bradley wrote: “Although it cannot be determinative, a sentencing court may use a COMPAS risk assessment as a relevant factor for such matters as: (1) diverting low-risk prison-bound offenders to a non-prison alternative; (2) assessing whether an offender can be supervised safely and effectively in the community; and (3) imposing terms and conditions of probation, supervision, and responses to violations.” In response to Loomis’ contention that race and particularly gender can skew results and interfere with due process, Bradley further explained that “considering gender in a COMPAS risk assessment is necessary to achieve statistical accuracy." Her opinion further cautioned that judges should be made aware of potential limitations of risk assessment tools and suggested guidelines for use such as quality control and validation checks on the software as well as user education.

A report from the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), however, warns that in many cases issues of validity and training are overlooked rather than addressed. To underscore their argument, EPIC, a public interest research center that focuses public attention on emerging privacy and civil liberties issues, compiled a chart matching states with the risk assessment tools used in their sentencing practices. They found more than 30 states that have never run a validation process on the algorithms in use within their state, suggesting that most of the time these programs are used without proper calibration.

The Problem with COMPAS

In states using COMPAS, defendants are asked to fill out a COMPAS questionnaire when they are booked into the criminal justice system. Their answers are analyzed by the proprietary COMPAS software, which generates predictive scores such as “risk of recidivism” and “risk of violent recidivism.”

These scores, calculated by the algorithm on a one-to-10 scale, are shown in a bar chart with 10 representing those most likely to reoffend. Judges receive these charts before sentencing to assist with determinations. COMPAS is not the only element a judge is supposed to consider when determining length and severity of sentence. Past criminal history, the circumstances of the crime (whether there was bodily harm committed or whether the offender was under personal stress) and whether or not the offender exhibits remorse are some examples of mitigating factors affecting sentencing. However, there is no way of telling how much weight a judge assigns to the information received from risk assessment software.

Taken on its own, the COMPAS chart seems like a reasonable, even helpful, bit of information; but the reality is much different. ProPublica conducted an analysis of the COMPAS algorithm and uncovered some valid concerns about the reliability and bias of the software.

In an analysis of over 10,000 criminal defendants in Broward County, Florida, it found that recidivism rates were only correctly predicted 61 percent of the time and violent recidivism was correctly predicted a mere 20 percent of the time.

The algorithm was correct in predicting recidivism at roughly the same rate for both black and white defendants, but black defendants were more often incorrectly predicted to be more likely to reoffend than their white counterparts, even when controlling for factors such as prior crimes.

Surprisingly, ProPublica also discovered that defendants under 25 were 2.5 times more likely to receive a higher score, even when elements such as gender and prior crimes were considered. Controlling for the same factors, females were 19.4 percent more likely to be assigned a high score as compared to males, even though females have a lower criminality rate overall.

Regardless of why the biases occurred, the facts support the notion that the software is indeed subjective at some level, possibly due to a developer’s bias, improper data or faulty quality control and review processes.

Other Studies on Risk Assessment Models

ProPublica is not the only organization to study the impact of gender or race on risk assessment models. In 2016, a paper published by Jennifer Skeem of the University of California, Berkeley and Christopher Lowenkamp, of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts discussed the possibility of racial bias in risk assessment computer models. Their studies concluded that the risk of racial bias was narrow and, “In light of our results, it seems that concerns expressed about risk assessment are exaggerated.” However, their conclusion indicated that there were both “good instruments” and “bad instruments” (referring to the risk assessment software) and that racial disparity in sentencing is a combination of factors, including the location where the defendant is sentenced, judges’ intuition and guidelines that heavily weigh criminal history. Another study conducted in 2013 by a team of Canadian researchers on the Level of Service Inventory (LSI), another risk assessment computer modeling tool, found racial bias more evident in the United States than in Canada.

Northpointe, now Equivant, the maker of COMPAS software, defends its product, claiming COMPAS has been peer-reviewed by several journals including in Criminal Justice and Behavior (January 2009) and in the Journal of Quantitative Criminology (June 2008).

Issues Raised

Improperly validated or invalidated risk assessments can contribute to racial disparity in sentencing. Many risk assessment algorithms take into account personal characteristics like age, sex, geography, family background and employment status. As a result, two people accused of the same crime may receive sharply different bail or sentencing outcomes based on inputs that are beyond their control. Even worse, defendants have no way of assessing or challenging the results.

Moreover, the data risk assessment algorithms rely on comes from a system in which racial identity makes a difference in arrest probability. Blacks are more likely to be stopped by police than whites, more likely to be incarcerated once detained and more likely to receive a longer sentence than their Caucasian counterparts. Data skewed at its basis in this way is more likely to exacerbate a race disparity problem than eliminate it, particularly when results are presented under the guise of objectivity.

Linda Mandel of Mandel-Clemente, P.C. in Albany, New York said: “It horrifies me that you would try to use an objective program to deal with what’s supposed to be a subjective determination. Due process is a subjective term. The Eighth Amendment is not drafted in terms that are easily determinable in objective data.”

But that’s exactly what COMPAS is designed to do: remove the subjectivity by providing an allegedly objective data source. And sentencing guidelines are not the only area affected by flawed objectivity. Algorithms that promise neutrality are rapidly becoming a part of daily life. Currently, the only algorithm consumers have a right to question is their credit score, under the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) signed into law in 1970 by President Nixon. Under the FCRA, you can see the data used to determine your score and challenge and/or delete it.

While credit reporting data determines whether a person gets a loan or signs an apartment lease, COMPAS data affects whether or not a human being is sent to prison and for how long, without allowing them to see, understand or refute the information used to calculate their score.

Conclusion

It’s apparent that many states use risk assessment tools such as COMPAS without oversight and guidance procedures. Judges, correctional facility staff and anyone else who uses risk assessment tools should, at the very least, be required to attend training on its proper use, be re-trained as necessary and have a quality assurance methodology in place to assure proper deployment.

There should be a confidential third-party assessment of each risk assessment tool on a yearly basis to ensure the information is accurate across racial and gender groups and is adjusted to reflect changing norms within a specific geographic population.

Risk assessment tools can assist in determining sentencing and recidivism potential if the tools are properly validated, staff is properly trained and there is third-party accountability built into the process. If the tool is created with true gender and race neutrality, it can be a “voice of reason” in court proceedings, as an algorithm should have no bias. However, the tool is only as good as the creator. If the creators of these algorithms have any preconceived notions regarding gender and race as it relates to criminal activity, then the tool will simply perpetuate this bias.

System validation, training and quality assurance are all steps toward ensuring fairness in risk assessment technologies. But a better idea might be to strive for transparency and the right to see and challenge data, particularly when it is being used to make decisions that have such a critical impact on the outcome of people’s lives.. Predicting Recidivism

Recidivism is the likelihood of a person convicted of a crime to offend again. Currently, this rate is determined by predictive algorithms. The outcome can affect everything from sentencing decisions to whether or not a person receives parole.

To determine how accurate these algorithms actually are in practice, a team led by Dartmouth College researchers Julia Dressel and Hany Farid conducted a study of a widely-used commercial risk assessment software known as Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions (COMPAS). The software determines whether or not a person will re-offend within two years following their conviction.

The study revealed that COMPAS is no more accurate than a group of volunteers with no criminal justice experience at predicting recidivism rates. Dressel and Farid crowdsourced a list of volunteers from a website, then randomly assigned them small lists of defendants. The volunteers were told each defendant’s sex, age, and previous criminal history then asked to predict whether they would re-offend within the next two years.

The accuracy of the human volunteer's predictions included a mean of 62.1 percent and a median of 64.0 percent — very close to COMPAS' accuracy, which is 65.2 percent.

Additionally, researchers found that even though COMPAS has 137 features, linear predictors with just two features (the defendant's age and their number of previous convictions) worked just as well for predicting recidivism rates.

The Problem of Bias

One area of concern for the team was the potential for algorithmic bias. In their study, both human volunteers and COMPAS exhibited similar false positive rates when predicting recidivism for black defendants — even though they didn't know the defendant's race when they were making their predictions. The false positive rate for black defendants was 37 percent, whereas it was 27 percent for white defendants. These rates were fairly close to those from COMPAS: 40 percent for black defendants and 25 percent for white defendants.

In the paper's discussion, the team pointed out that "differences in the arrest rate of black and white defendants complicate the direct comparison of false-positive and false-negative rates across race." This is backed up by NAACP data which, for example, has found that "African Americans and whites use drugs at similar rates, but the imprisonment rate of African Americans for drug charges is almost 6 times that of whites."

The authors noted that even though a person's race was not explicitly stated, certain aspects of the data could potentially correlate to race, leading to disparities in the results. In fact, when the team repeated the study with new participants and did provide racial data, the results were about the same. The team concluded that "the exclusion of race does not necessarily lead to the elimination of racial disparities in human recidivism prediction."

Image Credit: AlexVan / Creative Commons

Repeated Results

COMPAS has been used to evaluate over 1 million people since it was developed in 1998 (though its recidivism prediction component wasn't included until 2000). With that context in mind, the study's findings — that a group of untrained volunteers with little to no experience in criminal justice perform on par with the algorithm — were alarming.

The obvious conclusion would be that the predictive algorithm is simply not sophisticated enough and is long overdue to be updated. However, when the team was ready to validate their findings, they trained a more powerful nonlinear support vector machine (NL-SVM) with the same data. When it produced very similar results, the team faced backlash, as it was assumed they had trained the new algorithm too closely to the data.

Dressel and Farid said they specifically trained the algorithm on 80 percent of the data, then ran their tests on the remaining 20 percent in order to avoid so-called "over-fitting" — when an algorithm's accuracy is affected because it's become too familiar with the data.

Predictive Algorithms

The researchers concluded that perhaps the data in question is not linearly separable, which could mean that predictive algorithms, no matter how sophisticated, are simply not an effective method for predicting recidivism. Considering that defendants' futures hang in the balance, the team at Dartmouth asserted that the use of such algorithms to make these determinations should be carefully considered.

As they stated in the study's discussion, the results of their study show that to rely on an algorithm for that assessment is no different than putting the decision "in the hands of random people who respond to an online survey because, in the end, the results from these two approaches appear to be indistinguishable."

“Imagine you’re a judge, and you have a commercial piece of software that says we have big data, and it says this person is high risk,” Farid told Wired, “Now imagine I tell you I asked 10 people online the same question, and this is what they said. You’d weigh those things differently.”

Predictive algorithms aren't just used in the criminal justice system. In fact, we encounter them every day: from products advertised to us online to music recommendations on streaming services. But an ad popping up in our newsfeed is of far less consequence than the decision to convict someone of a crime.. In a study of COMPAS, an algorithmic tool used in the US criminal justice system , Dartmouth College researchers Julia Dressel and Hany Farid found that the algorithm did no better than volunteers recruited via a crowdsourcing site. COMPAS, a proprietary risk assessment algorithm developed by Equivant (formerly Northpointe), considers answers to a 137-item questionnaire in order to provide predictions that are used in making decisions about sentencing and probation. In a case brought by a defendant, who claimed that the use of an algorithm whose inner workings were a proprietary secret, violated due process.



Prior criticisms such as a 2017 study by ProPublica have led to debates about how to measure fairness. However, none tested the crucial claim, that the algorithm provided more accurate predictions than humans would. To test this, Dressel and Farid asked 400 non-expert volunteers to guess if a defendant would commit another crime within two years given short descriptions of defendants from ProPublica's investigation in which seven pieces of information were highlighted. On average, the group got the right answer 63% of the time - and 67% of the time if their answers were pooled. COMPAS's accuracy is 65%. Because Equivant does not disclose its algorithm for study, the researchers went on to build their own, making it as simple as possible; it showed an accuracy of 67%, even using only two pieces of information, the defendant's age and number of previous convictions. Other researchers have found similar results.



Farid and Dressel argue that the point is not that these algorithms should not be used, but that they should be understood and required to prove that they work before they are put into use determining the course of people's lives.



https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/01/equivant-compas-algorithm/550646/

tags: criminal justice, COMPAS, algorithms, research, scientific testing, Dartmouth, error rates, prediction

writer: Ed Yong

Publication: The Atlantic

. When Netflix gets a movie recommendation wrong, you’d probably think that it’s not a big deal. Likewise, when your favourite sneakers don’t make it into Amazon’s list of recommended products, it’s probably not the end of the world. But when an algorithm assigns you a threat score from 1 to 500 that is used to rule on jail time, you might have some concerns about this use of predictive analytics.

To the general audience, predictive policing methods are probably best known from the 2002 science fiction movie Minority Report starring Tom Cruise. Based on a short story by Philip K. Dick, the movie presents a vision of the future in which crimes can be predicted and prevented. This may sound like a far-fetched utopian scenario. However, predictive justice already exists today. Built on advanced machine learning systems, there is a wave of new companies that provide predictive services to courts; for example, in the form of risk-assessment algorithms that estimate the likelihood of recidivism for criminals.

Can machines identify future criminals?

After his arrest in 2013, Eric Loomis was sentenced to six years in prison based in part on an opaque algorithmic prediction that he would commit more crimes. Equivant (formerly Northpointe), the company behind the proprietary software used in Eric Loomis’ case, claims to have provided a 360-degree view of the defendant in order to provide detailed algorithmic assistance in judicial decision-making.

This company is one of many players in the predictive justice field in the US. A recent report by the Electronic Privacy Information Center finds that algorithms are increasingly used in court to “set bail, determine sentences, and even contribute to determinations about guilt or innocence”. This shift towards more machine intelligence in courts, allowing AI to augment human judgement, could be extremely beneficial for the judicial system as a whole.

However, an investigative report by ProPublica found that these algorithms tend to reinforce racial bias in law enforcement data. Algorithmic assessments tend to falsely flag black defendants as future criminals at almost twice the rate as white defendants. What is more, the judges who relied on these risk-assessments typically did not understand how the scores were computed.

This is problematic, because machine learning models are only as reliable as the data they’re trained on. If the underlying data is biased in any form, there is a risk that structural inequalities and unfair biases are not just replicated, but also amplified. In this regard, AI engineers must be especially wary of their blind spots and implicit assumptions; it is not just the choice of machine learning techniques that matters, but also all the small decisions about finding, organising and labelling training data for AI models.

Biased data feeds biased algorithms

Even small irregularities and biases can produce a measurable difference in the final risk-assessment. The critical issue is that problems like racial bias and structural discrimination are baked into the world around us.

For instance, there is evidence that, despite similar rates of drug use, black Americans are arrested at four times the rate of white Americans on drug-related charges. Even if engineers were to faithfully collect this data and train a machine learning model with it, the AI would still pick up the embedded bias as part of the model.

Systematic patterns of inequality are everywhere. If you look at the top grossing movies of 2014/2015 you can see that female characters are vastly underrepresented both in terms of screen time and speaking time. New machine learning models can quantify these inequalities, but there are a lot of open questions about how engineers can proactively mitigate them.

Google’s recent “Quick, Draw!” experiment vividly demonstrates why addressing bias matters. The experiment invited internet users worldwide to participate in a fun game of drawing. In every round of the game, users were challenged to draw an object in under 20 seconds. The AI system would then try to guess what their drawing depicts. More than 20 million people from 100 nations participated in the game, resulting in over 2 billion diverse drawings of all sorts of objects, including cats, chairs, postcards, butterflies, skylines, etc.

But when the researchers examined the drawings of shoes in the data-set, they realised that they were dealing with strong cultural bias. A large number of early users drew shoes that looked like Converse sneakers. This led the model to pick up the typical visual attributes of sneakers as the prototypical example of what a “shoe” should look like. Consequently, shoes that did not look like sneakers, such as high heels, ballerinas or clogs, were not recognized as shoes.

Loading...

Recent studies show that, if left unchecked, machine learning models will learn outdated gender stereotypes, such as “doctors” being male and “receptionists” being female. In a similar fashion, AI models trained on images of past US presidents have been shown to predict exclusively male candidates as the likely winner of the presidential race.

Designing for fairness in AI

In October 2018, the International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners released the Declaration on Ethics and Protection in Artificial Intelligence, one of the first steps towards a set of international governance principles on AI. The declaration states that “unlawful biases or discriminations that may result from the use of data in artificial intelligence should be reduced and mitigated”. Inherent to this notion is the assertion that AI needs to be evaluated on a broader set of ethical and legal criteria; not just based on classification accuracy and confusion matrices. Expanding on this argument, I propose the following principles of AI fairness for the purposes of predictive justice:

1. Representation

In order to guard against unfair bias, all subjects should have an equal chance of being represented in the data. Sometimes this means that underrepresented populations need to be thoughtfully added to any training datasets. Sometimes this also means that a biased machine learning model needs to be substantially retrained on diverse data sources. In the case of Google’s Quick, draw! experiment, the engineering team had to intentionally seek out additional training examples of other shoe types, like high heels and crocs, to compensate for gaps in representation. What is more, recent research offers new algorithmic techniques to measure misrepresentation and help mitigate unwanted bias in machine learning.

2. Protection

Machine learning systems need to avoid unjust effects on individuals, especially impacts related to social and physical vulnerabilities, and other sensitive attributes. These could include race, ethnicity, gender, nationality, sexual orientation, religion and political beliefs. The overall fairness of an algorithm must be judged by how it impacts the most vulnerable people affected by it.

However, simply omitting sensitive variables from machine learning models would not solve the problem due to the variety of confounding factors that may be correlated with them. With regard to criminal justice, research shows that omitting race from a dataset of criminal histories still results in racially disparate predictions. Instead, there is early evidence that racial disparities and other pieces of sensitive information can be removed from data-sets using a supplementary machine learning algorithm. The hope is that, in the future, this approach could help engineers build a “race-neutral” AI system for recidivism prediction.

3. Stewardship

Algorithmic fairness means much more than the absence of injustice; it represents the active responsibility to continuously strive for fairness in the design of machine learning systems. In this regard, the spirit of stewardship can only be borne by a diverse team that challenges each other’s implicit assumptions.

In regular unconscious bias busting exercises, for example, teams can develop an appreciation for the diversity of perspectives. Several NGOs, including ProPublica and Privacy International, have also begun advocating for diversity stewardship in companies that build large-scale AI models. Thus, only by creating a culture of inclusiveness can companies create the right conditions for teams to address unfair bias in machine learning.

4. Authenticity

The final principle refers not just to the authenticity of training data, but also the authenticity of AI predictions as they are used to inform human decision-making. For instance, despite continued efforts to limit potentially harmful or abusive applications, machine learning has been regretfully used in the past to distort reality through deep-fakes. In this context, the pervasive misuse of AI could help malicious actors to generate fake videos of people saying things they never said before, or fake images of situations that never happened in real life. Taken to the extreme, this could lead to a world when judges can no longer determine whether any depicted media or evidence corresponds to the truth. Hence, this has led some media pundits to conclude that the “biggest casualty to AI won't be jobs, but the final and complete eradication of trust in anything you see or hear.” Fortunately, AI researchers are already working on effective and scalable counter-measures to detect various forms of manipulated media.

Machines against machine bias

These four principles can help to start a conversation about AI fairness, especially when used for predictive justice. Fairness is never the default in machine learning. As such, engineers need to take proactive steps to change this default. If we do not actively design for AI fairness, we risk perpetuating harmful biases and stereotypes.. . Our most sophisticated crime-predicting algorithms may not be as good as we thought. A study published today in Science Advances takes a look at the popular COMPAS algorithm — used to assess the likelihood that a given defendant will reoffend — and finds the algorithm is no more accurate than the average person’s guess. If the findings hold, they would be a black eye for sentencing algorithms in general, indicating we may simply not have the tools to accurately predict whether a defendant will commit further crimes.

Developed by Equivant (formerly Northpointe), the COMPAS algorithm examines a defendant’s criminal record alongside a series of other factors to assess how likely they are to be arrested again in the next two years. COMPAS’ risk assessment can then inform a judge’s decisions about bail or even sentencing. If the algorithm is inaccurate, the result could be a longer sentence for an otherwise low-risk defendant, a significant harm for anyone impacted.

Reached by The Verge, Equivant contested the accuracy of the paper in a lengthy statement, calling the work “highly misleading.”

“The ceiling in predictive power is lower than I had thought”

COMPAS has been criticized by ProPublica for racial bias (a claim some statisticians dispute), but the new paper, from Hany Farid and Julia Dressel of Dartmouth, tackles a more fundamental question: are COMPAS’ predictions any good? Drawing on ProPublica’s data, Farid and Dressel found the algorithm predicted reoffenses roughly 65 percent of the time — a low bar, given that roughly 45 percent of defendants reoffend.

In its statement, however, Equivant argues it has cleared the 70 percent AUC standard for risk assessment tools.

The most surprising results came when researchers compared COMPAS to other kinds of prediction. Farid and Dressel recruited 462 random workers through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform, and asked the Turkers to “read a few sentences about an actual person and predict if they will commit a crime in the future.” They were paid one dollar for completing the task, with a five dollar bonus if their accuracy was over 65 percent. Surprisingly, the median Turker ended up two points better than COMPAS, clocking in at 67 percent accuracy.

George Mason University law professor Megan Stevenson has done similarly pessimistic research on risk assessment programs in Kentucky, and says she was surprised by just how bad the finding was for COMPAS. The sample size is small so it’s hard to be sure COMPAS’ disadvantage will hold up in further testing, but it’s damning enough that COMPAS is in the same general range as such an ad hoc system.

“The paper definitely has me thinking that the ceiling in predictive power is lower than I had thought,” Stevenson told The Verge, “and I didn’t think it was that high to begin with.”

The researchers also edged out COMPAS with a simpler linear algorithm, which looked only at a defendant’s age and criminal record. That algorithm also out-performed COMPAS, a finding that surprised even the researchers, given the 137 factors involved in a COMPAS assessment. “We typically would expect that as we add more data to a classifier and / or increase the complexity of the classifier, that the classification accuracy would improve,” Farid told The Verge. “We found this not to be the case.”

Equivant challenged this finding as well, arguing the small data sample had led the researchers to over-fit their algorithm. Furthermore, the company downplayed the number of different factors that actually determine a given risk assessment. “In fact, the vast number of these 137 are needs factors and are not used as predictors in the COMPAS risk assessment,” the company said. “The COMPAS risk assessment has six inputs only.”

Risk assessment scores have become an increasingly common feature of the US Justice System, with similar products often used for decisions about pre-trial detainment. Controversially, the specific details of the algorithm are often treated as a trade secret, making it difficult for lawyers to contest the results. Last year, the Supreme Court declined to hear a case challenging the legality of the COMPAS system, which argued that keeping the algorithm secret violated the defendant’s constitutional rights.

Notably, both systems maintained roughly the same bias profile as COMPAS, maintaining predictive parity across races but distributing error disproportionately, with false positives more likely to occur among black defendants.

The study’s biggest weakness is the data itself. Court records are notoriously messy, and the data is drawn from just two years in a specific county, which could limit its predictive power. Recidivism studies also face a long-standing problem in reliably measuring false positives, since a longer prison sentence can prevent a person from reoffending while they’re incarcerated.. . The American criminal justice system couldn’t get much less fair. Across the country, some 1.5 million people are locked up in state and federal prisons. More than 600,000 people, the vast majority of whom have yet to be convicted of a crime, sit behind bars in local jails. Black people make up 40 percent of those incarcerated, despite accounting for just 13 percent of the US population.

With the size and cost of jails and prisons rising—not to mention the inherent injustice of the system—cities and states across the country have been lured by tech tools that promise to predict whether someone might commit a crime. These so-called risk assessment algorithms, currently used in states from California to New Jersey, crunch data about a defendant’s history—things like age, gender, and prior convictions—to help courts decide who gets bail, who goes to jail, and who goes free.

But as local governments adopt these tools, and lean on them to inform life-altering decisions, a fundamental question remains: What if these algorithms aren’t actually any better at predicting crime than humans are? What if recidivism isn’t actually that predictable at all?

That’s the question that Dartmouth College researchers Julia Dressel and Hany Farid set out to answer in a new paper published today in the journal Science Advances. They found that one popular risk-assessment algorithm, called Compas, predicts recidivism about as well as a random online poll of people who have no criminal justice training at all.

"There was essentially no difference between people responding to an online survey for a buck and this commercial software being used in the courts," says Farid, who teaches computer science at Dartmouth. "If this software is only as accurate as untrained people responding to an online survey, I think the courts should consider that when trying to decide how much weight to put on them in making decisions."

Man Vs Machine

While she was still a student at Dartmouth majoring in computer science and gender studies, Dressel came across a ProPublica investigation that showed just how biased these algorithms can be. That report analyzed Compas's predictions for some 7,000 defendants in Broward County, Florida, and found that the algorithm was more likely to incorrectly categorize black defendants as having a high risk of reoffending. It was also more likely to incorrectly categorize white defendants as low risk.

That was alarming enough. But Dressel also couldn't seem to find any research that studied whether these algorithms actually improved on human assessments.

'There was essentially no difference between people responding to an online survey for a buck and this commercial software being used in the courts.' Hany Farid, Dartmouth College

"Underlying the whole conversation about algorithms was this assumption that algorithmic prediction was inherently superior to human prediction," she says. But little proof backed up that assumption; this nascent industry is notoriously secretive about developing these models. So Dressel and her professor, Farid, designed an experiment to test Compas on their own.

Using Amazon Mechanical Turk, an online marketplace where people get paid small amounts to complete simple tasks, the researchers asked about 400 participants to decide whether a given defendant was likely to reoffend based on just seven pieces of data, not including that person's race. The sample included 1,000 real defendants from Broward County, because ProPublica had already made its data on those people, as well as information on whether they did in fact reoffend, public.

They divided the participants into groups, so that each turk assessed 50 defendants, and gave the following brief description:. The credibility of a computer program used for bail and sentencing decisions has been called into question after it was found to be no more accurate at predicting the risk of reoffending than people with no criminal justice experience provided with only the defendant’s age, sex and criminal history.

The algorithm, called Compas (Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions), is used throughout the US to weigh up whether defendants awaiting trial or sentencing are at too much risk of reoffending to be released on bail.

Since being developed in 1998, the tool is reported to have been used to assess more than one million defendants. But a new paper has cast doubt on whether the software’s predictions are sufficiently accurate to justify its use in potentially life-changing decisions.

Hany Farid, a co-author of the paper and professor of computer science at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire, said: “The cost of being wrong is very high and at this point there’s a serious question over whether it should have any part in these decisions.”

The analysis comes as courts and police forces internationally are increasingly relying on computerised approaches to predict the likelihood of people reoffending and to identify potential crime hotspots where police resources should be concentrated. In the UK, East Midlands police force are trialling software called Valcri, aimed at generating plausible ideas about how, when and why a crime was committed as well as who did it, and Kent Police have been using predictive crime mapping software called PredPol since 2013.

The trend has raised concerns about whether such tools could introduce new forms of bias into the criminal justice system, as well as questions about the regulation of algorithms to ensure the decisions they reach are fair and transparent.

The latest analysis focuses on the more basic question of accuracy.

Farid, with colleague Julia Dressel, compared the ability of the software – which combines 137 measures for each individual – against that of untrained workers, contracted through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk online crowd-sourcing marketplace.

The academics used a database of more than 7,000 pretrial defendants from Broward County, Florida, which included individual demographic information, age, sex, criminal history and arrest record in the two year period following the Compas scoring.

The online workers were given short descriptions that included a defendant’s sex, age, and previous criminal history and asked whether they thought they would reoffend. Using far less information than Compas (seven variables versus 137), when the results were pooled the humans were accurate in 67% of cases, compared to the 65% accuracy of Compas.

In a second analysis, the paper found that Compas’s accuracy at predicting recidivism could also be matched using a simple calculation involving only an offender’s age and the number of prior convictions.

“When you boil down what the software is actually doing, it comes down to two things: your age and number of prior convictions,” said Farid. “If you are young and have a lot of prior convictions you are high risk.”

“As we peel the curtain away on these proprietary algorithms, the details of which are closely guarded, it doesn’t look that impressive,” he added. “It doesn’t mean we shouldn’t use it, but judges and courts and prosecutors should understand what is behind this.”

Seena Fazel, a professor of forensic psychiatry at the University of Oxford, agreed that the inner workings of such risk assessment tools ought to be made public so that they can be scrutinised.

However, he said that in practice, such algorithms were not used to provide a “yes or no” answer, but were useful in giving gradations of risk and highlighting areas of vulnerability – for instance, recommending that a person be assigned a drug support worker on release from prison.

“I don’t think you can say these algorithms have no value,” he said. “There’s lots of other evidence suggesting they are useful.”

The paper also highlights the potential for racial asymmetries in the outputs of such software that can be difficult to avoid – even if the software itself is unbiased.



The analysis showed that while the accuracy of the software was the same for black and white defendants, the so-called false positive rate (when someone who does not go on to offend is classified as high risk) was higher for black than for white defendants. This kind of asymmetry is mathematically inevitable in the case where two populations have a different underlying rate of reoffending – in the Florida data set the black defendants were more likely to reoffend – but such disparities nonetheless raise thorny questions about how the fairness of an algorithm should be defined.

Farid said the results also highlight the potential for software to magnify existing biases within the criminal justice system. For instance, if black suspects are more likely to be convicted when arrested for a crime, and if criminal history is a predictor of reoffending, then software could act to reinforce existing racial biases.

Racial inequalities in the criminal justice system in England and Wales were highlighted in a recent report written by the Labour MP David Lammy at the request of the prime minister.



People from ethnic minorities “still face bias, including overt discrimination, in parts of the justice system”, Lammy concluded.

The findings were published in the journal Science Advances.. IN AMERICA, computers have been used to assist bail and sentencing decisions for many years. Their proponents argue that the rigorous logic of an algorithm, trained with a vast amount of data, can make judgments about whether a convict will reoffend that are unclouded by human bias. Two researchers have now put one such program, COMPAS, to the test. According to their study, published in Science Advances, COMPAS did neither better nor worse than people with no special expertise.

Julia Dressel and Hany Farid of Dartmouth College in New Hampshire selected 1,000 defendants at random from a database of 7,214 people arrested in Broward County, Florida between 2013 and 2014, who had been subject to COMPAS analysis. They split their sample into 20 groups of 50. For each defendant they created a short description that included sex, age and prior convictions, as well as the criminal charge faced.. In a study published Wednesday, a pair of Dartmouth researchers found that a popular risk assessment algorithm was no better at predicting a criminal offender’s likelihood of reoffending than an internet survey of humans with little or no relevant experience.

Photo: AP

The study compared the crime-predicting powers of an algorithm called COMPAS, already used by multiple states, to those of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, a sort of micro TaskRabbit where people are paid to complete small assignments. Using an online poll, the researcher asked “turks” to predict recidivism based on a few scant facts about offenders.

Given the sex, age, crime charge, criminal degree, and prior convictions in juvenile, felony and misdemeanour courts of 50 offenders, each of the 400 survey takers had to assess their likelihood of reoffending. The Dartmouth researchers had information on whether the offenders in question actually did reoffend.

In the end, the authors of the study found that the risk assessment algorithm was no more accurate than people without criminal justice experience. From Wired:

Overall, the turks predicted recidivism with 67 per cent accuracy, compared to Compas’ 65 per cent. Even without access to a defendant’s race, they also incorrectly predicted that black defendants would reoffend more often than they incorrectly predicted white defendants would reoffend, known as a false positive rate. That indicates that even when racial data isn’t available, certain data points — like number of convictions — can become proxies for race, a central issue with eradicating bias in these algorithms.

The high number of false positives is telling. Even without knowing a given defendant’s race, black defendants were erroneously believed to be more likely to offend more frequently. While it’s wildly unethical to explicitly include race as a factor in likelihood of reoffending, race nonetheless colours each data point. Racial segregation, for example, impacts where offenders live and go to school.

If a school is under-served (as are a number of schools in minority neighbourhoods), that impacts students’ education level and thus their income and, more broadly speaking, their opportunities in life. There’s no variable for race specifically, but it broadly affects each factor that goes into calculating recidivism.

Whether using humans or machines, there’s no real way to extricate race from any of the indicators of crime. The problem is when the reality of bias becomes concealed behind an algorithmic veneer of objectivity. We don’t expect supposedly impartial machines to repeat human biases and, as a result, those biases become invisible.

“Underlying the whole conversation about algorithms was this assumption that algorithmic prediction was inherently superior to human prediction,” Julia Dressel, the paper’s co-author, told Wired.

In a statement, the company that makes COMPAS claimed the study only confirmed “the valid performance of the COMPAS risk model,” writing, “The findings of ‘virtually equal predictive accuracy’ in this study, instead of being a criticism of the COMPAS assessment, actually adds to a growing number of independent studies that have confirmed that COMPAS achieves good predictability and matches the increasingly accepted AUC standard of 0.70 for well-designed risk assessment tools used in criminal justice.”

So what actually correlates with recidivism? It’s startlingly simple: age and prior convictions. Older people were less likely to get into trouble again; younger people, more.

[Wired]. An “unbiased” computer algorithm used for informing judicial decisions appears to be no better than the assessments of a random group of people, according to

Receive emails about upcoming NOVA programs and related content, as well as featured reporting about current events through a science lens. Email Address Zip Code Subscribe

a recent study. What’s more, the algorithm appears to issue racially biased recommendations.

COMPAS, the software that many judges use to inform their sentencing decisions, tends to classify black people as higher risk and white people as lower risk, despite not including explicit information about race. In practice, this translates into more lenient rehabilitation suggestions for white defendant and more rigorous programs black defendant of the same recidivism risk.

Support Provided By Learn More

A study of 1,000 defendants suggests that an algorithm used by judges in several states may be wrong a third of the time.

The results—and the bias—were statistically indistinguishable from judgement calls made by human volunteers randomly selected over the internet.

Here’s John Timmer writing at Ars Technica:

The significance of that discrepancy is still the subject of some debate, but two Dartmouth College researchers have asked a more fundamental question: is the software any good? The answer they came up with is “not especially,” as its performance could be matched by recruiting people on Mechanical Turk or performing a simple analysis that only took two factors into account.

The racial bias likely creeps into the COMPAS algorithm through data on arrest rates, which in some cities and counties are skewed. Equivalent, the developer of COMPAS, says it relies on 127 different data points when determining rehabilitation programs, but only six when assessing whether an individual is at risk of reoffending.

The new study builds on an investigation by Pro Publica, which analyzed COMPAS’s performance in Broward County, Florida, between 2013–2014. Researchers at Dartmouth College took data on age, sex, and criminal history for 1,000 defendants and handed it to volunteer “judges” who were recruited over the internet via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service.

COMPAS was no better than the study’s participants in assessing the risk of a defendant reoffending. The study’s authors compared the recommendations made by COMPAS and the participants with real-world data on reoffenders. In practice, more white people who were predicted not to reoffend did (40.3% humans, 47.9% COMPAS) compared with black people (29.2% humans, 30.9% COMPAS). Moreover, a larger proportion of black criminals were wrongly predicted to reoffend (37.1% humans, 40.4% COMPAS) compared with white defendants (27.2% humans, 25.4% COMPAS).

While COMPAS and human judgements were similar, failed judgement calls tended to favor white defendants and disadvantage black defendants. False positives are instances where criminals do not reoffend, but were predicted to. False negatives are instances where criminals were predicted to reform but did not.

The Dartmouth researchers also managed to reproduce the software’s predictions by consulting only 5% of the information the algorithm purportedly considers.

“The widely used commercial risk assessment software COMPAS is no more accurate or fair than predictions made by people with little or no criminal justice expertise,” write the study’s authors. “A simple linear predictor provided with only two features is nearly equivalent to COMPAS with its 137 features.”. . . Recidivism risk assessment is the process of determining the likelihood that an accused, convicted, or incarcerated persons will reoffend. The process is aimed at assisting in the determination of the appropriate limitation on the freedom of the subject. With innovation in technology especially in the area of artificial intelligence (AI), recidivism risk assessment tools built on AI technology are now well-developed and used in the criminal justice system. Algorithmic tools are increasingly being used in the Canadian criminal justice system in pre-trial, sentencing, and post-sentencing phases in predicting the future criminal behaviour of accused, convicted, or incarcerated persons. The increasing use of AI technology in recidivism risk assessment in the criminal justice system raises many legal issues. I will discuss three of such issues in this blog post.

The first issue relates to what I refer to as algorithmic racism. This arises from the use of historical data in training AI risk assessment tools. This has the tendency to perpetuate historical bias which are replicated in the risk assessments by these AI tools. The second issue relates to the legality of the use of AI risk assessments by judges in sentencing decisions. I argue that AI risk assessment based on data from a general population has the tendency to deprive a convict of the right to an individualized sentence based on accurate information. Third, there is the problem with the proprietary nature of the methodology used in the AI risk assessment tools. This is especially the case where offenders challenging their criminal sentence seeks access to these proprietary trade secrets.

Issues with the use of AI in criminal justice risk assessment

Algorithmic Racism – Old wine in a new bottle

By algorithmic racism, I refer to systemic, race-based bias arising from the use of AI-powered tools in the analysis of data in decision making resulting in unfair outcomes to individuals from a particular segment of the society distinguished by race. AI is subsistent on big data. Vast amount of data is required to train AI algorithm to enable it make predictions. Some of the data used to train the AI algorithm in recidivism risk assessment are historical data from eras of mass incarceration, biased policing, and biased bail and sentencing regimes characterised by systemic discrimination against particular sections of the society.

Canada is not immune from the problems associated with data from biased policing as evident from data from the decades-old “carding” practice by some police departments. Toronto, Edmonton and Halifax are notorious for this practice which has been routinely criticized for disproportionately targeting young Black and Indigenous people. Of more serious concern is the fact that some of this data is blind to recent risk reduction and anti-discrimination reforms aimed at addressing the over-representation of particular segments of the society in the criminal justice system. Unlike explicit racism which is self-evident and obvious, algorithmic racism is not overtly manifest, but rather is obscured and buried in data. In fact, it is further blurred by a belief system that tends to portray technology as race neutral and colour blind. Algorithmically biased assessments by AI tools (unlike expert evidence) are accepted in the criminal justice system without further examination or cross examination. This is related to “anchoring” – a term used by behavioural scientists to refer to cognitive bias that arises from human tendency to rely on available piece of data in decision making with little regard (if any) to flaws in the data.

Understanding algorithmic racism would require the use of the appropriate lens to examine its hidden tentacles embedded or obscured in AI risk assessment technologies used in the criminal justice system. Critical Race Theory (CRT) provides a fitting lens for the study of algorithmic racism. CRT was developed by legal scholars who were intent in understanding the lived experiences of people of colour in a judicial system that presented itself as objective and race neutral. CRT adopts the notion that racism in endemic in society. According to Devon W. Carbado, in “Critical What What?” (2011) 43:5 Connecticut Law Review 1593 at 1609, CRT challenges the dominant principles that colour-blindness results in race neutrality and that colour consciousness generates racial preferences. CRT sees the notion of colour-blindness as a mechanism that rather blinds people to racist policies which further perpetuates racial inequality.

Bennett Capers noted that the writings that influenced the critical race movement tend to center on some recurring themes such as – that colour-blind laws tend to conceal real inequality in the society, that reforms that apparently benefit the minorities are only possible when they are in the interest of the white majority, and that race tends to be avoided in the law. CRT scholars are progressively utilizing research studies on implicit bias to illustrate the assertions. Examination of these research studies and data tends to unmask the implicit racism buried in laws and social practices that results in unfair outcomes or bias against individuals from particular segment of the society characterised by race.

Using CRT to study these AI risk assessment tools and their operation will reveal how these new technologies reinforce implicit and explicit bias against minority groups – especially Blacks and Indigenous offenders who constitute a disproportionate population in the Canadian criminal justice system.

“Madea Goes to Jail” – Individualized versus Generalized Sentence

An important issue that goes to the legality of risk assessment tools in criminal justice sentencing relates to the use of group-based analytics in sentencing decisions pertaining to an individual offender as opposed to an individualized sentence based on accurate information specific to the offender. In a best-case scenario, algorithmic risk assessment tools base their risk assessment on general factors similar to the offender’s background and not particularly specific to the offender. In R. v. Jackson 2018 ONSC 2527 (CanLII), Justice Nakatsuru of the Ontario Superior Court noted that “[s]entencing is and has always been a very individual process. A judge takes into account the case-specific facts of the offence and the offender to determine a just and fit sentence… The more a sentencing judge truly knows about the offender, the more exact and proportionate the sentence can be.” (para 3 [emphasis added]).

Modern recidivism risk assessment tools built on algorithms and big data provide anything but individualized assessment or prediction of recidivism. At best they provide predictions based on average recidivism of a general population of people who share characteristics similar to that of the accused. This process has the inadvertent tendency to perpetuate stereotypes associated with certain group (e.g. racial minorities). Sentencing judges as front-line workers in the criminal justice system have an obligation to ensure that the information they utilize in their sentencing decisions does not directly or indirectly contribute to negative stereotypes and discriminations. R. v. Ipeelee, 2012 SCC 13 (CanLII) at para 67.

The use of recidivism risk assessment tools is very common in the Canadian criminal justice system. Kelly Hannah-Moffat in “Actuarial Sentencing: An ‘Unsettled’ Proposition”, noted the tendency by lawyers and probation officers to classify individuals who obtain high risk assessment scores as high-risk offenders rather than simply as individuals who share similar characteristics with average members of that group. She noted that “[I]nstead of being understood as correlations, risk scores are misconstrued in court submissions, pre-sentence reports, and the range of institutional file narratives that ascribe the characteristics of a risk category to the individual.” (at page 12)

Our criminal justice system is founded on the idea that people should be treated as individuals under the law and not as part of a statistic – and this applies even in criminal justice sentencing. Hence, recidivism risk assessment technologies built on AI and big data have been criticized as depriving the accused of the right to an individualized sentence based on accurate information. (See the US case of State v. Loomis, 881N.W.2d 749 (Wis. 2016) hereafter Loomis). This raises a Section 7 Charter issue arising from the constitutionality of assessments made by the technology, especially in relation to the right of a convicted offender to an individualized sentencing based on accurate information.

In Loomis, the offender challenged the use of algorithmic risk assessment in his sentencing. He argued that the use of the risk assessment score generated by COMPAS algorithmic risk assessment tool violated his right to an individualized sentence because the tool relied on information about a broader group in making an inference about his likelihood of recidivism. The offender argued that any consideration of information about a broader population in the determination of his likelihood of recidivism violates his right to due process. The Loomis court noted the importance of individualized sentencing in the criminal justice system and acknowledged the fact that COMPAS data on recidivism in not individualized, but rather based on data of groups similar to the offenders.

Sentencing is a critical aspect of our criminal justice system. The more the sentencing judges know about offenders’ past, present and likely future behaviour including their personal background – historical, social, and cultural – the more exact and proportional sentences the judges are able to craft. While risk scores can effectively compliment judges’ effort to craft appropriate sentences, judges should always be reminded that algorithmic risk scores are just one of many factors to be used in the determination of appropriate sentences and, hence, appropriate weight should be attached to this factor along with many other factors in order to ensure that the sentence being imposed on the offender is as individualized as it could be. Justice Nakatsuru in R. v. Jackson rightly observed that:

A sentence imposed based upon a complex and in-depth knowledge of the person before the court, as they are situated in the past and present reality of their lived experience, will look very different from a sentence imposed upon a cardboard cut-out of an “offender” (at para 103).

Sentencing judges should not at any point in the sentencing process relent to use their discretion to overrule or ignore algorithmic risk scores that seems to fall out of tune with other factors considered in the sentencing process, especially where such risk scores tend to aggravate rather than mitigate the sentence.

Another problem that may further impair the ability of AI risk assessment tools to achieve individualized risk score arises where AI tools that are developed and tested on data from a particular group are used on another group not homogeneous to the original group. This will result in representation bias. Attempts to deploy AI technology to group(s) not effectively represented in the training data used to develop and train the technology would usually result in flawed and inaccurate results. This problem has been evident in facial recognition software. A report in The New York Times shows that AI facial recognition software in the market today are developed and trained on data of predominantly white males. While the software has been able to achieve 99 percent accuracy in recognizing faces of white males, this has not been the case with other races and the female gender. The darker the skin, the more inaccurate and flawed the result – up to 35% error rate for darker skinned women.

In Ewert v. Canada 2018 SCC 30 (CanLII), an Indigenous man brought a Charter challenge against his risk assessment by the Correctional Services Canada (CSC). The tools used in the assessment had been developed and tested on predominantly non-Indigenous population. The Supreme Court ruled that CSC’s obligation under s.24(1) Corrections and Conditional Release Act applies to results generated by risk assessment tools. Thus, an algorithmic tool which is developed and trained based on data from one predominant cultural group will be, more likely than not, cross-culturally variant to some extent when applied to another cultural group not represented (or not adequately represented) in the data used to train the tool. This will be unlikely to generate an individualized assessment of the offender, but will be more likely to result in flawed assessment of the risk posed by the offender.

Proprietary Right versus Charter Right

The methodology used in the assessment of recidivism by AI risk assessment tools are considered proprietary trade secrets and not generally available for scrutiny by the court, the accused, or the prosecution. The proprietary rights attached to these tools restrict the ability of the judge, the prosecution, or the accused to access or determine what factors are taken into consideration in the assessment, and how much weight is attached to those factors. The secretive process associated with these tools becomes problematic where offenders challenging their adverse sentence resulting from assessments made by these tools seek access to the proprietary information to prove the arbitrariness of the deprivation of their liberty or to invalidate the sentence resulting from the assessment.

In our criminal justice system, an accused person has the charter rights to personal liberty and procedural fairness both at trial as well as at sentencing. These rights also arise at incarceration when decisions affecting the liberty of the offender are being made by correctional officers (e.g. security classification). (See May v. Ferndale Institution, 2005 SCC 82 (CanLII) at para 76 (hereafter May v. Ferndale). The imposition of a criminal sentence requiring incarceration clearly involves a deprivation of the charter rights of the offender. Such deprivation must be in accordance with the law. But what if a convicted offender seeks access to a proprietary trade secret in a commercial AI tool used to assess the recidivism resulting in the criminal sentence? This will give rise to conflict between the proprietary right of a business corporation to its trade secret and the charter rights of the offender.

In May v. Ferndale, Correctional Services Canada (CSC) had used a computerised risk tool – Security Reclassification Scale (SRS) – in reviewing of the security classification of some inmates from minimum to medium risk. The inmates sought access to the scoring matrix used by the computerised SRS tool. They were denied access by the CSC. The Supreme Court of Canada ruled that the inmates were clearly entitled to access the SRS scoring matrix, and that a failure to disclose the information constituted a major breach of procedural fairness. According to the court:

The appellants were deprived of information essential to understanding the computerized system which generated their scores. The appellants were not given the formula used to weigh the factors or the documents used for scoring questions and answers. The appellants knew what the factors were, but did not know how values were assigned to them or how those values factored into the generation of the final score. (at para 117 [Emphasis added])

The Supreme Court noted that it was commonsensical that the matrix scores as well as the methodology used in arriving at the security classification should have been made available to the inmates:

As a matter of logic and common sense, the scoring tabulation and methodology associated with the SRS classification score should have been made available. The importance of making that information available stems from the fact that inmates may want to rebut the evidence relied upon for the calculation of the SRS score and security classification. This information may be critical in circumstances where a security classification depends on the weight attributed to one specific factor. (at para 118 [Emphasis added])

Conclusion

Artificial intelligence technologies will continue to revolutionize our justice system. If properly used, it could greatly enhance efficient and effective administration of our criminal justice system. However, the use of AI in our criminal justice system does raise some serious and novel legal issues that must be addressed. It is important to study these legal issues with the ultimate objective of developing a framework that will mitigate the adverse and discriminatory impacts of these technologies on the rights of accused persons and offenders.

________

Gideon Christian, PhD

Assistant Professor (AI and Law)

Faculty of Law, University of Calgary. The criminal justice system is becoming automated. At every stage — from policing and investigations to bail, evidence, sentencing and parole — computer systems play a role. Artificial intelligence deploys cops on the beat. Audio sensors generate gunshot alerts. Forensic analysts use probabilistic software programs to evaluate fingerprints, faces and DNA. Risk-assessment instruments help to determine who is incarcerated and for how long.

Technological advancement is, in theory, a welcome development. But in practice, aspects of automation are making the justice system less fair for criminal defendants.

The root of the problem is that automated criminal justice technologies are largely privately owned and sold for profit. The developers tend to view their technologies as trade secrets. As a result, they often refuse to disclose details about how their tools work, even to criminal defendants and their attorneys, even under a protective order, even in the controlled context of a criminal proceeding or parole hearing.

Take the case of Glenn Rodríguez. An inmate at the Eastern Correctional Facility in upstate New York, Mr. Rodríguez was denied parole last year despite having a nearly perfect record of rehabilitation. The reason? A high score from a computer system called Compas. The company that makes Compas considers the weighting of inputs to be proprietary information. That forced Mr. Rodríguez to rely on his own ingenuity to figure out what had gone wrong.