It was an odd, unanswerable question. Still, it was on the mind of at least one Google user in India.

What is the country’s “ugliest” language?

For anyone who typed the question into the platform’s search bar recently, its algorithm produced a fact box confident of the answer: a tongue called Kannada, spoken by tens of millions of people in India’s south.

Informed of that result, many of them weren’t happy.

Several politicians in the state of Karnataka, where most Kannada speakers live, went on social media this week to register their outrage.. Bengaluru: Google, the US-based search engine giant, on Thursday found itself at the receiving end of severe criticism over its search results that returned Kannada as the answer to a question on India’s “ugliest language”. Kannada backlash: A Google spokesperson said the way content is described on the Internet can sometimes yield surprising results to specific queries and the company takes swift corrective action when it is made aware of them (AP)

According to the image shared widely on social media, the answer to a question, “What is the ugliest language in India?” was Kannada. “The answer is Kannada spoken by around 40 million people in south India,” according to a screenshot of the search results.

HT launches Crick-it, a one stop destination to catch Cricket, anytime, anywhere. Explore now!

The backlash from the Kannada language speakers, which is one of the national languages in the country, was so spontaneous that #Kannada was trending on microblogging site, Twitter across the country. Other hashtags like #KannadaQueenOfAllLanguages also continued to trend on Twitter.

Google later deleted the response that had offended people, saying the search results weren’t always perfect.

“Sometimes, the way content is described on the Internet can yield surprising results to specific queries. We know this is not ideal, but we take swift corrective action when we are made aware of an issue and are continually working to improve our algorithms. Naturally, these are not reflective of the opinions of Google, and we apologize for the misunderstanding and hurting any sentiments,” a Google spokesperson said in a response to Hindustan Times.

But that was later. For hours, netizens and politicians from all major parties in Karnataka took to social media to criticise the Sundar Pichchai-led company.

“Kannada language has a history of its own, having come into existence as many as 2,500 years ago! It has been the pride of Kannadigas all through these two-and-a-half millennia,” Arvind Limbavali, Karnataka’s minister for forest, Kannada and culture said in a twitter post.

“If Kannada is now called ugliest language in India, it is merely an attempt by @Google

to insult this pride of Kannadigas. Demand apology from @Google ASAP to Kannada, Kannadigas. Legal action will be taken against @Google for maligning the image of our beautiful language!,” he added.

“Home to the great Vijayanagara Empire, #Kannada language has a rich heritage, a glorious legacy and a unique culture. One of the world’s oldest languages, Kannada had great scholars who wrote epics much before Geoffrey Chaucer was born in the 14th century. Apologise @GoogleIndia,” PC Mohan, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) member of parliament from Bengaluru Central posted on Twitter.

“This blunder is not acceptable. When it comes to language, whoever it is should be careful. Especially when it comes to Kannada, twice the care should be taken. Otherwise, there will be no surprise if the self-respect of Kannadiga’s that became a wave in just one hour, can turn into a Tsunami,” HD Kumaraswamy, former chief minister and Janata Dal (Secular) leader said in a post in Kannada on Twitter.. Google attracted a massive backlash in the country recently after it showed Kannada, a language predominantly spoken in the southwest part of India, as the answer to the search query "ugliest languages". Google has deleted the response and apologised, saying the search results weren’t always perfect.(HT_PRINT)

Kannada language speakers slammed the search engine giant for insulting the historically significant language, which dates back over 2,000 years. According to the image shared widely on social media, the answer to the question, “What is the ugliest language in India?” was Kannada. “The answer is Kannada spoken by around 40 million people in south India,” according to a screenshot of the search results.

HT launches Crick-it, a one stop destination to catch Cricket, anytime, anywhere. Explore now!

The Karnataka government also condemned this on Thursday and warned of appropriate action against Google. "This is a very condemnable thing. If Google or anyone else behaves in contempt of Kannada language or insults Kannada, appropriate action will be taken against them," said Arvind Limbawali, minister for forest, Kannada and culture in Karnataka.

Limbawali also said that the secretary of the department has been briefed about the matter and has been instructed to issue a notice to Google immediately.

Meanwhile, the tech giant has deleted the response and apologised, saying the search results weren’t always perfect. Google also said that the concerned team takes a swift corrective action when it is made aware of the issue.

It also said that the it is working to continuously to improve the algorithms and "does not reflect the opinions of Google."

So what exactly happened?

The search results on Google are algorithm-based and depend on keywords for websites and their online content. When a user enters their query, the algorithm looks across the internet for websites and articles that have related keywords and brings the result that it thinks is the best fit.

This is commonly known as search engine optimisation or SEO. Hence, experts say that the real culprits here are sites that may have written content based on these lines and used the keywords.

In December 2018, Google CEO Sundar Pichai told US Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren that how the company has little to no control over the search results after it showed Donald Trump's images to a query related to the word "idiot." During the House Judiciary Committee hearing, Pichai explained that the search results are based on Google search indexes, webpages and the keywords, images attached to those pages.