In December 2019, Utah startup Latitude launched a pioneering online game called AI Dungeon that demonstrated a new form of human-machine collaboration. The company used text-generation technology from artificial intelligence company OpenAI to create a choose-your-own adventure game inspired by Dungeons & Dragons. When a player typed out the action or dialog they wanted their character to perform, algorithms would craft the next phase of their personalized, unpredictable adventure.

Last summer, OpenAI gave Latitude early access to a more powerful, commercial version of its technology. In marketing materials, OpenAI touted AI Dungeon as an example of the commercial and creative potential of writing algorithms.

Then, last month, OpenAI says, it discovered AI Dungeon also showed a dark side to human-AI collaboration. A new monitoring system revealed that some players were typing words that caused the game to generate stories depicting sexual encounters involving children. OpenAI asked Latitude to take immediate action. "Content moderation decisions are difficult in some cases, but not this one,” OpenAI CEO Sam Altman said in a statement. “This is not the future for AI that any of us want."

Latitude turned on a new moderation system last week—and triggered a revolt among its users. Some complained it was oversensitive and that they could not refer to an “8-year-old laptop” without triggering a warning message. Others said the company’s plans to manually review flagged content would needlessly snoop on private, fictional creations that were sexually explicit but involved only adults—a popular use case for AI Dungeon.

In short, Latitude’s attempt at combining people and algorithms to police content produced by people and algorithms turned into a mess. Irate memes and claims of canceled subscriptions flew thick and fast on Twitter and AI Dungeon’s official Reddit and Discord communities.

“The community feels betrayed that Latitude would scan and manually access and read private fictional literary content,” says one AI Dungeon player who goes by the handle Mimi and claims to have written an estimated total of more than 1 million words with the AI’s help, including poetry, Twilight Zone parodies, and erotic adventures. Mimi and other upset users say they understand the company’s desire to police publicly visible content, but say it has overreached and ruined a powerful creative playground. “It allowed me to explore aspects of my psyche that I never realized existed,” Mimi says.

A Latitude spokesperson said its filtering system and policies for acceptable content are both being refined. Staff had previously banned players who they learned had used AI Dungeon to generate sexual content featuring children. But after OpenAI’s recent warning, the company is working on “necessary changes,” the spokesperson said. Latitude pledged in a blog post last week that AI Dungeon would “continue to support other NSFW content, including consensual adult content, violence, and profanity.”

Blocking the AI system from creating some types of sexual or adult content while allowing others will be difficult. Technology like OpenAI’s can generate text in many different styles because it is built using machine learning algorithms that have digested the statistical patterns of language use in billions of words scraped from the web, including parts not appropriate for minors. The software is capable of moments of startling mimicry, but doesn’t understand social, legal, or genre categories as people do. Add the fiendish inventiveness of Homo internetus, and the output can be strange, beautiful, or toxic.