เมื่อวันที่ 9 ก.ค ในเฟซบุ๊กของ Thai PBS ได้เผยแพร่คำชี้แจงกรณีปรากฏข้อความที่ไม่เหมาะสมบนเฟซบุ๊กเพจ Thai PBS ในช่วงเวลาของการถ่ายทอดสด พิธีจุดเทียนถวายพระพรชัยมงคล เนื่องในโอกาสวันเฉลิมพระชนมพรรษาพระบาทสมเด็จพระเจ้าอยู่หัว 28 กรกฎาคม 2563 ว่า ตามที่มีผู้นำภาพจากหน้าเพจของเฟซบุ๊กไทยพีบีเอส และมีการเผยแพร่ ส่งต่อในสื่อสังคมออนไลน์ ซึ่งเป็นข้อความภาษาไทยที่ถูกแปลด้วยบริการแปลอัตโนมัติของเฟซบุ๊ก จากข้อความต้นฉบับภาษาอังกฤษว่า “[Live] Candle-lighting ceremony to celebrate the birthday of HM the King on July 28, 2020 at 6.45 PM” เนื่องจากเป็นการถ่ายทอดสดที่มีคำบรรยายภาษาอังกฤษ จึงต้องมีการสื่อสารด้วยข้อความภาษาอังกฤษในโพสต์ดังกล่าวต่อมามีผู้แชร์ภาพหน้าเฟซบุ๊กเพจไทยพีบีเอส ที่มีข้อความภาษาไทยที่ไม่เหมาะสม ซึ่งเป็นข้อความที่เกิดจากบริการแปลอัตโนมัติ (Auto Translation) ของเฟซบุ๊กที่แปลจากข้อความภาษาอังกฤษข้างต้น โดยผู้ใช้บริการที่มีการตั้งค่าเปิดการแปลอัตโนมัติเท่านั้น จึงจะเห็นข้อความการแปลดังกล่าว และบุคคลดังกล่าวได้มีการบันทึกภาพหน้าจอ (Capture) จากเฟซบุ๊กไทยพีบีเอส นำมาเผยแพร่บนสื่อสังคมออนไลน์ ทำให้เกิดความเข้าใจคลาดเคลื่อนว่าเป็นข้อความที่ทีมงานไทยพีบีเอสเป็นผู้เขียนเมื่อ ส.ส.ท. ได้รับทราบข้อมูลการแปลที่ไม่เหมาะสม ซึ่งถูกนำไปเผยแพร่ จนทำให้เกิดผลกระทบในวงกว้าง ทีมงานจึงได้ดำเนินการปรับข้อความภาษาอังกฤษให้เป็นภาษาไทยที่ถูกต้องในทันที เพื่อป้องกันการแปลที่ผิดพลาดจากระบบการแปลอัตโนมัติของเฟซบุ๊ก เมื่อเวลา 18.55 น. ขณะเดียวกัน ทีมงานได้แจ้งปัญหาและติดต่อขอคำชี้แจงถึงความผิดพลาดที่เกิดขึ้นกับทางเฟซบุ๊กในทันที โดยนาย Alex Fenby, News Partnerships Lead, South East Asia สำนักงานเฟซบุ๊ก ณ ประเทศสิงคโปร์ ซึ่งได้ตอบกลับมาว่า “Sincere apologies for the mis-translation. It was caused by a technical error on auto-translation. We have filed an urgent task with your policy and IT teams to investigate and will keep you informed once we hear back.”พร้อมกันนั้น ส.ส.ท. ได้เร่งรัดให้เฟซบุ๊กรายงานผลการตรวจสอบความผิดพลาดที่เกิดขึ้นโดยเร็ว รวมทั้งควรแถลงขออภัยอย่างเป็นทางการ เนื่องจากทีมงานได้ตรวจสอบเมื่อเวลาประมาณ 23.00 น. พบว่า การแปลข้อความที่ผิดพลาดนี้ได้ปรากฏอยู่ในเฟซบุ๊กเพจทางการของสื่ออื่น ๆ ไม่ใช่แต่เฉพาะเพจของไทยพีบีเอสเท่านั้นซึ่งตอกย้ำชัดเจนว่าบริการแปลอัตโนมัติของเฟซบุ๊กมีปัญหาส.ส.ท. ได้ออกคำชี้แจงถึงเหตุการณ์ดังกล่าว เมื่อเวลาประมาณ 00.23 น. ตามลิงก์ www.facebook.com/ThaiPBS…/…/a.348532055084/10164385062660085 และได้ดำเนินการสอบหาข้อเท็จจริงทันที พร้อมแจ้งไปยังสำนักพระราชวัง กระทรวงดิจิทัลเพื่อเศรษฐกิจและสังคม (DE) และหน่วยงานที่เกี่ยวข้องรับทราบลำดับเหตุการณ์ทั้งหมดแล้วส.ส.ท. ขออภัยที่มีผู้นำข้อความจากบริการแปลอัตโนมัติที่ผิดพลาดของเฟซบุ๊กไปเผยแพร่ โดย ส.ส.ท. ขอยืนยันว่าจะติดตามหาข้อเท็จจริงของเหตุการณ์ดังกล่าวอย่างถึงที่สุด และรายงานให้สาธารณะได้รับทราบ ทั้งนี้ ส.ส.ท. จะไม่ยอมให้มีการใช้ประโยชน์ในการสร้างสถานการณ์ที่ส่งผลกระทบต่อความรู้สึกของประชาชนและประเทศชาติองค์การกระจายเสียงและแพร่ภาพสาธารณะแห่งประเทศไทย. FB told to apologise for 'mistranslation'

Buddhipongse: Little cooperation

The Digital Economy and Society (DES) Ministry has sent an urgent letter to Facebook in Singapore and Thailand, demanding the social media giant take responsibility over a mistranslated headline from English into Thai about the live broadcasting ceremony to celebrate the King's birthday seen on several media Facebook pages on Tuesday.

Meanwhile, the Technology Crime Suppression Division (TCSD) has started the process of collecting evidence for an investigation into the matter following a complaint made by Thai PBS TV station on Wednesday.

Thai PBS came under fire from viewers who spotted the mistranslated message on its Facebook page.

The mistranslation which offended the monarchy was from the English: "[Live] Candle-lighting ceremony to celebrate the birthday of HM the King on July 28, 2020 at 6.45 PM".

Thai PBS on Wednesday said the Thai message was auto translated from the English version on its Facebook page. The Thai Public Broadcasting Service, which runs Thai PBS station, said the organisation corrected the message at 6.55pm once it was informed.

The channel also informed the Royal Household Bureau, the DES Ministry and various agencies about the incident.

DES Minister Buddhipongse Punnakanta confirmed the letter was sent to Facebook on Thursday. He was speaking at a meeting with National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission (NBTC) together with internet service providers (ISPs) about efforts to deal with the violations of the Computer Crime Act.

Over the past seven months, the DES Ministry has worked with various agencies, including the TCSD and ISPs, to gather evidence and file complaints to the courts, which were asked to issue an order to close websites or delete information which breached the law.

So far this year, the DES Ministry has received complaints about 8,715 URLs. Of them, the courts issued orders for action against 7,164 URLs. Most complaints were linked to social networks.

Following the court orders, YouTube removed 1,507 out of 1,616 URLs on the court orders from its platform. Facebook took down 1,316 out of 4,676 URLs as ordered by the court.

"Facebook gave little cooperation although it operates a service in Thailand and Thais generate fruitful benefits to the company," Mr Buddhipongse said.

Meanwhile, Facebook Thailand said it has temporarily deactivated the auto-translate feature on Facebook and Instagram while offering its apologies. Facebook said it is also revamping the quality of the feature.. Minister for Digital Economy and Society, Buddhipongse Punnakanta, criticised Facebook this week for offering ‘little cooperation’ to Thai authorities in removing material requested under current legal provisions. He compared the social network giant to rival silicon valley operator YouTube who he said had removed over 93% of all requested material this year, with Facebook it was just over 28%.

Social media giant Facebook found itself under investigation this week by the Crime Technology Division of the Royal Thai Police following an inadvertent blunder during a ceremony for the King’s birthday on Tuesday which led to a message being badly translated into Thai which generated floods of complaints from citizens to popular National TV broadcaster, Thai PBS.

A letter from the Digital Economy and Society Ministry has been sent to Facebook and a criminal enquiry launched by the Technology Crime Suppression Division of the Royal Thai Police following a blunder on Tuesday in which a message announcing a candlelight ceremony for the Thai King’s birthday got lost in the automatic translation system the social network platform uses, leading to a flood of complaints by irate viewers to national broadcaster Thai PBS who had aired the Facebook material on its social channels.

Official complaints were received from outraged viewers on Wednesday leading the public broadcaster to file its own formal complaint with the Technology Crime Suppression Division of the police.

Facebook has announced that it has suspended the translation service in Thailand on its main social network and on Instagram promising to upgrade and enhance the quality of translation.

Although the basis for the complaint is a technical malfunction, many onerous legal provisions in Thailand are ones of strict liability including many offences under the Computer Crime Act of 2017.

Faulty translation during live broadcast caused a flood of complaints to Thai TV station

The public broadcaster pointed out that when it discovered the error in translation being displayed, 10 minutes after the live broadcast commenced, it took immediate steps to have it removed. The English version of the translated text was: ‘Live Candle-lighting ceremony to celebrate the birthday of HM the King on July 28, 2020, at 6.45 PM’.

After taking down the offensive content, the TV broadcaster immediately notified the Royal Household, the Ministry of Digital Economy and Society and other state agencies to explain what had happened.

Heightened tensions over portrayal of the monarchy

There are heightened tensions over the treatment of the Thai monarchy, in recent weeks, with ardent royalists becoming increasingly more active in protecting the revered institution from becoming embroiled or linked with political commentary brought on by student protests which erupted in Bangkok on July 18th.

It follows a recent pronouncement by Thailand’s Prime Minister, Prayut Chan ocha, that the government was refraining from prosecuting individuals under Thailand’s severe Lèse-majesté provision contained in Article 112 of the Criminal Code which can lead to up to 15 years imprisonment for any act that criticises the monarchy or even brings it into question.

The PM cited an explicit request from Thai King Vajiralongkorn or Rama X who has asked that this specific legal charge is not applied to suspected offenders.

Thai PM pledges support for a free press in Thailand after it fell four places in the 2020 rankings

Some weeks ago, the Prime Minister, General Prayut, pointed out that his government respected and would uphold the rights of a free press in the kingdom.

In the most recent Press Freedom Index, published in April, Thailand was ranked 140th in a world index of 180 countries surveyed. China was 177th as Thailand found itself behind such countries as Myanmar and Afghanistan.

The country fared better than Cambodia (144th) and noticeably Vietnam, Thailand’s growing commercial competitor which was only two places ahead of Communist China at 175th.

The report noted a ‘steep decline’ in press freedom across Asia.

It blamed this on ‘the adoption of undemocratic and totalitarian practices, the emergence of a populism that unleashes hatred on journalists, and extreme media polarization’.

Norway led the index.

Some feel latest rankings may not have factored in the dissolution of the military junta

Some observers have come out to criticise the rankings which suggests that the media in Thailand is working in an increasingly difficult environment and point to the relaxations on press freedoms that came about when the National Council for Peace and Order or military junta was finally dissolved in 2019.

This came months after the March General Election and prior to the installation of the democratically elected government.

It was accompanied by the scrapping of a range of significant restrictions on the press, slack which has been taken up by the media to place the government under stricter scrutiny and review.

Thai authorities, in recent times, have shown some reticence to use its powerful arsenal of powers against the press and coverage of political affairs in Thailand.

The environment for the press is generally less prohibitive and more robust than other Asian countries such as Singapore which was listed 18 places below Thailand in the most recent index.

However, many critics see a rise in nationalism, populism and xenophobia in Thailand which can lead to journalists and media outlets becoming a victim of legal complaints and prosecution driven by unofficial forces.

The Thai prime minister has consistently pointed out that while Thailand has its own unique society, culture and legal system which may prohibit it completely adapting western standards, he is willing to explore ways of raising the value of human rights in the kingdom as a priority.

Fake News centre turned out to be benign

Thailand introduced a Fake News Cente at the end of 2019 which has emerged as a fact-finding resource which examines and reports on news items spread by social media and some news websites based on public reports, which are misleading and detrimental to the public good.

It has not turned out to be a tool to oppress editorial freedom or to constrain reporting standards as some had feared when the scheme was first mooted by the government.

Nonetheless, there have been persistent reports that the government and key ministers would like to extend government monitoring and control of news, especially relating to national crises or fast-moving events through a news pool for reporting controlled by a centrally specified organisation.

Singled out Facebook for criticism at a meeting this week with internet and media players

This week, following Tuesday’s controversy, the Minister for the Digital Economy and Society, Buddhipongse Punnakanta, singled out Facebook for criticism suggesting that it was slow to cooperate with relevant authorities in removing internet pages and content under court orders obtained by Thai officials.

Minster Buddhipongse Punnakanta was speaking at a meeting on Thursday with the National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission and a range of internet service providers in Thailand.

Minister wants to see internet firms cooperate with the government in implementing the law

He called on all internet firms to cooperate with the government under Thailand’s draconian and wide-ranging Computer Crime Act which is increasingly used by security services and designated officials to regulate online content and prosecute egregious offenders.

Minister Buddhipongse compared the response to requests made under court order from Facebook to remove certain pages against another US internet giant popular in Thailand, YouTube.

The minister said that YouTube had removed 1,507 of 1,616 requested pages so far in 2020. By comparison, Facebook had only removed 1,316 out of 4,676 pages requested.

‘Facebook gave little cooperation although it operates a service in Thailand and Thais generate fruitful benefits to the company,’ Minister Buddhipongse observed following repeated surveys showing Thailand as among the Silicon Valley giant’s most successful markets in the world.

Further reading:

Two Immigration Bureau officers in Nonthaburi suspended after video appears to show bribe request

TV actress apologises for her wrongful bribery accusation against a Thai traffic police officer

UK wife abuser arrested by Immigration Bureau police in Bangkok for attempted murder

26-year-old partner advertised his ex-wife by her real name on Facebook with erotic photographs as a hooker

40 year old Thai billionaire and emerging election winner may face prosecution for Facebook post

Future Forward Party and leader are Thai junta’s worst nightmare in March 24th general election

Koh Tao claims by UK teenager questioned by Thai police – arrest warrants indicated for some media

Thailand passes new cyber security law allowing authorities more power to fight cyber crime and threats

Thai Government warns about fake news online as political discourse picks up before elections

Popular Phuket based Facebook page attacks foreigners and tourists in Thailand as virus tensions mount

Online child abuse is being exploited as a business opportunity by some Thai porn barons with networks

Porn web preying on Thai women in Bangkok. Arrest of the fiend at the heart of the blackmail and deceit

Thai man arrested for blackmail scheme targeting Thai women whom he paid to send him sex clips

Russian couple arrested, charged and fined for having sex in public on a Pattaya beach shown on video clip

﻿

﻿

﻿. Photo by Jon Russell, CC BY 2.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0, via Wikimedia Commons

On 28 July 2020, widely-followed media outlet, Thai PBS, posted a live stream of the candle-lighting ceremony celebrating His Majesty the King’s birthday on its Facebook page.

The caption of the live stream, said:

“[Live] Candle-lighting ceremony to celebrate the birthday of HM the King on July 2018, 2020 at 6.45 PM”

However, a glitch with Facebook’s translation tool changed the words “King’s birthday” to “King’s Memorial Day.,” in the Thai translation.

Expecting to see words celebrating his birthday, rather than the language displayed in memorial of death, many people became furious- with some even calling for the resignation of Thai PBS’s executives.

Consequently, Thai PBS published a statement the next day, passing the blame to the social media giant. Facebook swiftly admitted fault, issued a “profound apology” to the Thai people, and temporarily turned off auto-translation from English to Thai while the tool was fixed.

So, how did Facebook get the translation so wrong?

Translation AI cannot speak royal Thai

Facebook’s translation AI learns language from experience. As it relates to the Thai language, the tool hasn’t yet learned enough of royal vocabulary to understand the “royal version” of the word “birthday” (วันเฉลิมพระชนมพรรษา).

So, it picked another royal word most closely associated with “candle-lighting ceremony,” which is “Memorial Day.” This translates more literally as a death anniversary (วันคล้ายวันสวรรคต).

Though this specific instance seems like a simple translation faux pas, the more significant issue of the matter involves understanding how Facebook’s AI made this mistake and how the AI actually “learns from experience.”

Facebook has always used AI to translate users’ posts, and this is a tool that has become more sophisticated over the years due to investment in new technology.

In 2017, Facebook upgraded from using a simple dictionary-like tool that translates posts word-for-word, to a more sophisticated AI tool that considers the context of the posts before translating.

The AI utilizes what’s known as “long short-term memory neural networks”, which aim to partially replicate the mechanism of the human brain’s short term memory function, albeit with the advantage of being a machine.

How the AI works, in a nutshell, is: it keeps a data bank of sentences in the source language and their translations, called a “word pair.” The memory of each word pair is updated over time based on the new data it collects as users interact on— and with —the platform.

To date, Facebook has been able to leverage its massive user base to collect billions of word pairs, which is now encompassing over 2,000 translation directions. This collection of word pairs allows the AI translation tool to refine its translations, making the text output read more naturally when compared to word-for-word translations.

Unavoidably, there are still some words in the Thai language without any straightforward translation, and this is where the tool runs into a problem. When in a situation that does not have a precise contextual translation from Thai to English, Facebook’s AI defaults to choosing the word (or words) with the closest alignment based on historical inputs instead.

28 July is when this method revealed its flaws. Since ordinary Thai people rarely use royal language in everyday interactions, consequently there are minuscule samples of royal Thai vocabulary that the AI can learn from. So, the tool did not know these words yet, and instead of turning itself off to prevent a disaster, it displayed the very untimely and controversial translation error.

Thai is a tough nut to crack

In fairness, Thai is a difficult language to translate directly for a few reasons, and this applies to computers and humans (native Thai speakers) alike.

First, when forming complete sentences in the Thai language, single words are not separated by spaces. So, it is understandable that the AI struggles to identify the correct words in the presence of less context. A simplified example is the phrase “ตากลม,” which can mean either “round eyes” or “drying in the wind.” Like so many others, this phrase cannot be easily distinguished even by human readers without seeing other words in the same sentence, due mainly to the lack of space between words.

Second, the Thai language often uses spaces to break sentences and separate words into a list instead of using punctuation, such as commas and periods. The use, or lack, of punctuation creates an additional challenge for the AI because identifying separate sentences frequently requires an understanding of entire paragraphs.

Lastly, the volume of data available for AI training in the Thai language is quite small compared to other languages translated by AI on Facebook. The most extensive data set available for the Thai language machine learning tool contains one million word pairs- which is tiny when compared to the 40 million word pairs available in French.

Now, add in some rarely-used Thai royal vocabulary into the mix. It should now make more sense why the Thai language is one of the most challenging languages for this tool to translate accurately, without any human oversight.

Google Translate users are probably familiar with this, as well. Passages automatically translated into the Thai language usually appear stilted and, at times, incoherent.

Next-gen translation AI

Last month, the results of a new generation of AI called GPT-3 started to surface. The software is being developed by OpenAI, a research lab co-founded by Elon Musk. It is the third iteration of the machine learning model specialized in natural language processing.

To date, the results are impressive. As of now, the new AI translates most phrases fluently, and its “wow factor” is that it can also write essays, poems, and even programming language codes on its own.

The rapid growth of this tech is possible because GPT-3 trains AI on a much larger data set than its predecessor by orders of magnitude.

To illustrate the scale, the whole of the English Wikipedia only accounts for 0.6% of the total data the AI learns- and it was designed to train on the entirety of the internet.

Hopefully, this means the new generation of AI will be capable enough to tackle the complexities and nuances of translating the Thai language in its complexities, royal and otherwise.

This article was originally published at https://thisrupt.co/current-affairs/facebook-royal-translation-error/ on August 14, 2020 and authored by Kanop Soponvijit, the owner of this blog.. Facebook offers sincere apology to the Thai people over auto-translate error

Facebook has admitted to an error in its automatic translation, from English to Thai, and has offered a profound apology to the Thai people.

The mistake appeared on Thai PBS’s Facebook page on July 28th, His Majesty the King’s birthday.

In a statement to Thai media, Facebook said that it temporarily shut down the automatic translation of English to Thai, as soon as it learned of the mistake, while its technical team fixed and improved the quality of the program.

On Wednesday, Thai PBS management held a meeting with Facebook Singapore to discuss the progress of the investigation into errors produced by the automatic translation system.

Facebook insisted that the error was technical and that it was not the result of a hack.

In the statement, Facebook said that the error stemmed from mistranslation of Court wording.

Facebook’s automatic translation system has had to be disabled before, in 2018 and again in January this year, according to Al Jazeera.