In a courtroom full of blue, with dozens of uniformed Rochester police officers watching, a judge Thursday reversed the criminal conviction of a man once accused of attempting to murder a city police officer.

County Court Judge Christopher Ciaccio decided that a key piece of the prosecution's case — the city's crime-fighting tool known as ShotSpotter — was not reliable enough. While the tool, which attempts to alert police to gunshots, may be viable in cases with other corroborating evidence of a crime, it became the linchpin of the case against Silvon Simmons, Ciaccio ruled.

"This case did not have buttressing evidence," Ciaccio said.

In late October a jury acquitted Simmons of the 2016 attempted murder of a police officer, Joseph Ferrigno, who was chasing him on foot. The jury did convict Simmons of the criminal possession of a weapon that was found near Simmons, whom Ferrigno shot three times. Ferrigno alleged that he returned fire after Simmons shot at him.

The case in some ways was a microcosm of the strained relations between police and some lower-income neighborhoods in the city. Activists pushing for tougher oversight of police portrayed the incident as a rogue cop shooting an innocent man; Simmons ran from police after being mistaken for someone else the police were looking for.

Rochester police, meanwhile, saw the shooting episode as a reminder of the hazards faced daily by cops in a city where illegal guns are legion and people willing to use them are plentiful.

But what became the centerpiece of the evidence against Simmons, as well as the centerpiece of Ciaccio's decision to reverse the weapons possession conviction, were the questions of the ShotSpotter evidence, which provided audio support of Ferrigno's version of the shooting.

Simmons was scheduled to be sentenced Thursday, but Ciaccio sided with Simmons' defense, who asked that the lone weapons possession conviction be reversed because of the ShotSpotter evidence.

ShotSpotter is contracted by localities across the country, including Rochester. The company sets up microphones with transmitters attached, and they're located at different elevated spots around high-crime areas. ShotSpotter officials then alert police to possible shooting locations.

Assistant Public Defender Elizabeth Riley, one of Simmons' attorneys, argued that ShotSpotter had denied the defense evidence that could have raised more questions about the shooting. The city contracts with ShotSpotter for about $130,000 annually. Riley in court portrayed the relationship as one in which "a multi-million corporation preserved what (evidence) the customer wanted."

Assistant District Attorney Julie Hahn, one of the prosecutors in the case, said that ShotSpotter had reviewed its audio from the shooting, and found nothing else worthy of relaying to the prosecution or defense. The audio included five audible bursts; Ferrigno fired four times and said Simmons fired at him first with a single shot.

Hahn said Ferrigno has not been able to return to work because of the trauma of the incidence, and his family has suffered too. Ferrigno was cleared of any wrongdoing in an internal investigation.

"There's no consideration whatsoever given the officer," she said after Ciaccio's ruling.

After the ruling, Simmons continued to maintain his innocence.

"I just thank God," he said. " ... I still got shot for nothing."

ShotSpotter evidence

At the trial, Ferrigno and another officer who was the first on the scene after the shooting testified about the incident. The defense highlighted inconsistencies in the testimony, which the prosecution said were minor.

However, Ciaccio said, the jury clearly "discredited" the testimony; otherwise it likely would have convicted Simmons of the more serious charge. And, over four days of deliberations, the jury returned multiple times to listen to the ShotSpotter audio, and its apparent five audio bursts.

The case was originally with another judge, who denied a defense request for a broad subpoena of ShotSpotter records. ShotSpotter provided eight seconds of audio, obtained from different sensors around Immel Street, where the shooting occurred.

Initially the automated system did not recognize the sounds as gunfire, deciding it was instead likely an overhead helicopter. After the city requested that ShotSpotter review the audio, company officials decided there were at first three, then four, then five shots.

That subjective determination raised questions about the reliability of the ShotSpotter evidence, Ciaccio said. And, Riley contended, the lack of audio before or after those eight seconds hindered the defense. There may well have been other audio bursts that could have shown there were other noises picked up by the sensors, Riley said.

Hahn countered that ShotSpotter officials thoroughly reviewed the audio evidence and would have provided proof of any other sounds, had there been others.

Hahn said that Ciaccio's decision may be appealed. There is also the possibility of a retrial on the weapons possession charge, but that would likely have to go forward without the ShotSpotter evidence.

Defense attorneys tried unsuccessfully to have the ShotSpotter evidence disallowed at the trial. The Innocence Project even joined in, filing its first brief raising questions about ShotSpotter.

The Innocence Project, a nonprofit organization that works to free the wrongly convicted, highlighted in its brief what it said was the subjective nature of ShotSpotter evidence.

"While this technology may have advanced to the point where its data can be used as an investigative tool, it is not sophisticated enough to generate data that is reliable enough to be admitted as 'scientific' evidence in a criminal trial," the Innocence Project's Dana Delger wrote in her brief.

Ciaccio said that the science behind ShotSpotter may be reliable enough when it is partnered with other evidence. But that was not the case with the Simmons' shooting, he said.

"The ShotSpotter testimony was crucial," Ciaccio said.

(Includes reporting by staff writer Victoria Freile).

GCRAIG@Gannett.com. For Rochester police, the gunfire detection system known as ShotSpotter has been a valuable tool, alerting them to possible shootings and speeding up the police response time.

But, more than that, the system — which tries to locate gunfire through audio sensors placed in high-crime areas in the city — has also become part of courtroom testimony, with prosecutors using the recordings as evidence to bolster their allegations of where and how many shots were fired in criminal incidents.

However, the latter use — evidentiary support for prosecutions — is coming under increasing attack, as critics say the system's use is being stretched beyond its scientifc and analytical limits. The New York City-based Innocence Project, which has helped exonerate nearly 200 wrongly convicted people, recently filed a legal brief in a Rochester criminal case, challenging the reliability of ShotSpotter when it is used for more than a gunfire alert system.

“At the end of the day this is a machine that basically can tell you that there was a loud sound and then a human has to tell you whether it was gunfire or not,” Dana Delger, an attorney for the Innocence Project, said of ShotSpotter in a telephone interview.

In Rochester, ShotSpotter has been used as proof in several high-profile trials, most notably the trials of the men accused of the shooting in front of the Boys & Girls Club on Genesee Street that left three dead, and the murder of Rochester Police Officer Daryl Pierson by Thomas Johnson III.

The ShotSpotter-captured audio can give a jury a realistic picture of the events of a crime, said Monroe County First Assistant District Attorney Perry Duckles.

"ShotSpotter provides a captured audio of a point in time that we’re trying to explore at any given trial," said Duckles. "When it captures that sound it brings a jury there. It allows them to hear what actually happened the night in question."

With the Johnson trial, prosecutors were able to synchronize the ShotSpotter audio with surveillance videos, giving the jury not only a visual of the fatal shooting of Pierson but also the accompanying sounds of the gunshots.

But some critics see a system that is evolving in court beyond its original purpose of an alert mechanism.

“There’s a few things that are problematic," said Monroe County Assistant Public Defender Katie Higgins, who challenged the use of ShotSpotter audio in a recent criminal trial. "One is that it was designed to be an investigative tool for the police, to alert them to possible gunfire and allow them to respond to see if there are civilian witnesses or other evidence of gunfire.

"But it was not designed to be used as actual primary evidence (in a trial)," she said.

ShotSpotter needs to be subjected to more rigorous testing, from outside unbiased sources, to ensure its accuracy in courts, the critics say.

"While this technology may have advanced to the point where its data can be used as an investigative tool, it is not sophisticated enough to generate data that is reliable enough to be admitted as 'scientific' evidence in a criminal trial," the Innocence Project's Delger wrote in her brief filed in the Rochester case of Silvon Simmons, who was accused of trying to fatally shoot a police officer in 2016.

Alerting to crime

When the city of Rochester first contracted with California-based ShotSpotter in 2006, the company placed its audio sensors — advertised as "gunfire specific acoustic-sensing technology" — in several city areas with high crime rates.

Currently, the sensors cover more than seven square miles of the city, according to Paul Greene, the company's manager of forensics services. Fifteen to 20 sensors are used to cover a single square mile, Greene said in recent trial testimony.

Rochester now pays $130,000 annually to ShotSpotter, a cost that also includes the testimony at trials.

The sensors are microphones with transmitters attached, and they're located at different elevated spots around the city, ranging from utility poles to privately owned buildings. (ShotSpotter does not publicly release the locations.)

The sounds are transmitted to the company computers, which then studies the audio impulses and the likely distance from the monitoring sensors (at least three sensors need to register the sound for a determination of location). The computers subject the transmitted pulses to algorithms to try to determine the location and source, whether gunfire or something else, such as firecrackers or a backfiring car.

Those equations then offer a location for a likely shooting incident.

An analyst reviews the audio for "classification verification" — essentially deciding whether the computer was likely correct if it determined the sound was gunfire.

From the sound to notification to a 911 system and police of possible gunfire can take only a minute.

"It's not just a recording at that point," Duckles said. "It's actually a scientific analysis of the recording."

Police or prosecutors cannot make a sweeping request for long swaths of audio, said Special Assistant District Attorney Julie Hahn, who heads the office's major felony bureau and was one of the prosecutors in the Silvon Simmons case. Instead, the company provides the very narrow audio window when shots were fired, which is typically only seconds in duration.

"They will only provide us the pulses, the shots, which occurred with (a particular) incident," she said. Otherwise, Hahn said, the audio could be a privacy breach, possibly capturing snippets of loud street-level conversations or other sounds not connected to an investigation.

The company safeguards its information, and the proprietary relationship with its contracting municipalities gives ShotSpotter a different position than crime laboratories or medical examiner offices whose personnel might testify in a criminal trial about, for instance, forensics or likely causes of death.

A crime lab, for example, is typically a publicly funded operation, and its scientific processes are often an open book for prosecutors, defense lawyers, or forensics experts to explore and dissect for reliability. ShotSpotter officials contend that the algorithms are, like the Colonel Sanders fried chicken recipe, a proprietary company secret.

For defense lawyers, the relationship with the city and ShotSpotter is problematic, blocking them from a review that could show, for example, whether the sensors have been checked or serviced.

ShotSpotter says its research shows that the system is accurate 80 percent of the time within a 25-meter range from a shooting. Critics say that more peer review testing is needed to verify the system's accuracy.

A police shooting

On April 1, 2016, the ShotSpotter sensors picked up several audio bursts from a northwest Rochester neighborhood. Unable through its algorithms to detect a specific location, the system did not alert 911 or police. The system also thought the sounds to be the whirring blades of a helicopter, and not gunfire.

However, that night Officer Joseph Ferrigno chased Silvon Simmons, behind an Immel Street home. Ferrigno said Simmons shot at him once, then Ferrigno fired four shots, hitting Simmons three times.

Simmons was charged with attempted murder of a police officer and criminal possession of a weapon.

Police notified ShotSpotter of the shooting, and the company revisited the audio from the scene. The analysts at first thought there were three shots, then changed to number to four, then five. Analysts found the fifth shot after a prosecution request to review the audio again, prosecutors say.

Simmons' attorneys unsuccessfully sought to have the evidence withheld at trial, claiming that the changes from ShotSpotter officials showed a questionable coziness with authorities and the police version of the shooting. Prosecutors said the audio, once revisited, revealed the clear sounds of five shots.

The evidence was allowed. The jury heard the audio and acquitted Simmons of attempted murder but convicted him of criminal possession of a weapon. The jury may have decided that Simmons had a gun that accidentally discharged, attorneys surmised after the verdicts.

Attorneys agree that the ShotSpotter audio and testimony that there were five shots were crucial at Simmons' trial.

Because the system relies so heavily on a human review of the computerized data, there is a distinct possibility of "cognitive bias" — a determination that can be influenced by factors other than facts, the Innocence Project argued in the brief it filed in the Simmons' case.

In its brief, the Innocence Project highlighted the Rensselaer County trial of a man who fired shots at a police officer. In that case, one ShotSpotter analyst heard four gunshots in the captured audio file; another analyst heard three and said the fourth sound was likely a car backfiring.

The prosecution theory was that three shots were fired. The analyst who agreed with that number overrode the analyst's report of four shots and testified of his conclusion of three shots at the trial.

"This episode shows not only the subjective nature of the determination that a sound is actually the sound of gunfire, but also shows how ... (as here) information from the police may affect the conclusion of the analyst that a particular sound is gunfire," the Innocence Project argued.

Prosecutors say that they typically use ShotSpotter proof as supporting evidence in cases where there is no question a shooting occurred, such as the Genesee Street mass shooting, the murder of Officer Pierson, or the Immel Street shooting that led to Simmons' arrest and trial.

Investigative tool

The worth of ShotSpotter can be tough to argue, with its quick alerts to police of a detected shooting incident. Witnesses have been found and criminal cases solved because of the rapid ShotSpotter alerts.

While some cities — including Charlotte and Detroit — have abandoned the system, deciding the occasional false-positive alerts were too problematic, many cities, like Rochester, have decided the system is a valuable crime-fighting mechanism.

Almost 90 cities in the United States and elsewhere now use the system, according to the company.

"It's just a great tool to have with its analytics as far as being able to narrow down a (shooting) location," said Lt. Jeremy Lindauer.

Eric Piza, an associate professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said that ShotSpotter has been valuable in cities where residents in high-crime neighborhoods have grown inured to the sounds of gunfire and don't always call police.

Piza, who previously worked as a crime analyst with the Newark, New Jersey, Police Department, said that when asked if a locality should use ShotSpotter, his standard answer is, "It depends."

"I think the first important question to ask is what are you trying to get out of this technology," Piza said. " ... The empirical research that has been done on ShotSpotter suggests it might not affect crime reduction."

Piza said he has yet to see research that studies ShotSpotter's reliability when used for specific evidentiary purposes in trials.

ShotSpotter Chief Executive Officer Ralph Clark said the courtroom challenges to ShotSpotter evidence are to be expected, similar to challenges by defense attorneys to most forensics-type evidence.

The challenges are "normal court procedural motions, ones we see repeated time and time again whereby ultimately the evidence was ruled admissible and we testify as experts," Clark said.

Still, those who question the evidentiary use of ShotSpotter data say that judges should subject the company's systems to the same scientific analysis that has been required for the admission of evidence ranging from fingerprints to DNA. And that would require the company to open its system to outside review.

At Simmons' trial, ShotSpotter forensics service manager Greene said of the company, "We're not required to have peer review but we're open to it."

Assistant Public Defender Higgins said she hopes that day comes.

"It needs to be ... generally accepted within a wider scientific community," she said.

GCRAIG@Gannett.com. . ROCHESTER, NY — The man who was shot by a Rochester police officer in 2016 in what police alleged was a gunfire exchange, is now the subject of a three-part investigative series.

Reuters published a three-part narrative on the April 2016 shooting of Silvon Simmons and its aftermath. Reporters referenced numerous police reports and court documents, interviewed Simmons, his family, his lawyer and many others.

Here's what you need to know about the Reuters report, called "Shots in the Dark."

What happened when Rochester police shot Silvon Simmons?

A patrol officer for the Rochester Police Department, Joseph Ferrigno, shot Simmons three times from behind. Ferringo, who was 34 at the time, insisted that Simmons, then 33, fired first. He reported finding a 9mm Ruger pistol several feet from where Simmons lay bleeding.

Ferringo had followed the car Simmons was riding in on April 1, 2016, as the car was same model driven by a man suspected of threatening a woman with a gun several days earlier.

Simmons has maintained he ran toward his home because police shone a bright spotlight on the car and he didn't realize who was pursuing him. He told Reuters that he was terrified by the silhouette that emerged, unaware that the man was a police officer. He simply saw someone charging toward him, gun in hand.

Ferrigno claimed he ordered the occupants to remain in the car, and reacted when the passenger ran. He fired multiple times, saying he saw a white flash and heard a loud bang.

Simmons woke up hospitalized and on a ventilator. He had suffered severe injuries as a result of the gunshots. He was shocked when he was arrested since was the person who had been shot, the article read.

The Reuters article includes a narrative of what happened with Ferrigno's account and Simmons' point of view.

[Story continues after photo gallery]

What jurors said about Simmons' conviction and acquittal

Simmons spent 18 months in jail before his jury trial in October 2017. He refused a plea agreement and rejected a 15-year sentence, risking life in prison. Simmons was ultimately acquitted of three of the four felony charges he faced, including attempted aggravated murder for the accusation that he shot at Ferrigno.

After the two-week-long trial and four days of deliberation, Simmons was convicted of a felony weapons possession charge.

Three months later, at what was set to be Simmons' sentencing, a Monroe County Court judge reversed the criminal conviction. Judge Christopher Ciaccio ruled that the ShotSpotter evidence — audio recordings from sensors near the crime scenes — was likely central to the jury's one conviction but was not reliable as scientific proof.

According to the Reuters article, jurors told reporters that the gun possession verdict was a compromise to help Simmons avoid a worse fate. In part, they were concerned the judge would declare a mistrial and that another jury could convict him.

The article read: "When deliberations began, they said, the jury was split roughly along racial lines over whether Simmons, a Black man, had tried to kill Ferrigno, a white officer."

"Ultimately, the jurors said, they didn’t believe Simmons had fired at the cop. But they were confused about the origins of the gun that officers said they found near Simmons."

It remains unknown how the gun came to rest near Simmons and who last handled the gun.

Police said they found a gun at the scene. However, no fingerprints or DNA on the gun connected the firearm with Simmons, and neither he nor his clothes were tested for gunshot residue.

Impact of the Simmons case on police accountability

Figuring prominently in the report is the city’s efforts over the years at independent or civilian oversight of its police department. The latest effort seeks to grant a nine-member board disciplinary authority over officers up to and including the chief.

The police union has sued and a judge stripped the board of that powers. City Council appealed, with the case headed back to court in early December.

The NYCLU weighed in last Friday. writing in a court filing:

“Calls for such reforms are growing throughout New York State, and the resolution of this case will have a profound impact on movements for police accountability in places like Syracuse Kingston, Albany, New York City, and others, where communities and lawmakers are weighing proposals for strengthening and empowering police oversight agencies. Local Law No. 2 was ahead of this curve in Rochester, but looking ahead the reforms it enacted will be vital to the public interest in providing for independent and meaningful oversight of police across New York State.”

What role did Rochester's police union play in the Simmons case?

Much of the three-part narrative is devoted to the role the Rochester Locust Club, RPD's police union, played in the Simmons case as well as the union's role in disciplinary matters.

In the Reuters article, sources contend that the union "essentially controlled how discipline was handled through its contract with the city."

“Police policing police is codified,” the article read. “Lives can be ruined by a single decision of a police officer. Yet the police are not accountable to the public who pay their salaries.”

The article also includes excerpts from Ferrigno's interview with two RPD sergeants to determine if he had violated departmental policies.

What's next in Silvon Simmons' lawsuit against the police?

Simmons has filed a lawsuit against the Rochester Police Department, alleging that the department fabricated evidence to cover up Ferrigno’s mistake.

"In response, city attorneys denied the allegations and called Ferrigno’s conduct 'justified under the circumstances' and 'in accordance with the requirements of the law,'" the article read. The lawsuit is pending.

In the meantime, the Reuters article notes that Ferrigno was sidelined from his patrol job by post-traumatic stress and has applied for a medical retirement.

Both Simmons and Ferrigno are suffering lasting consequences and fear retaliation, the article read.

Includes reporting by staff writers Brian Sharp and Gary Craig.

Contact Victoria Freile at vfreile@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter @vfreile and Instagram @vfreile. This coverage is only possible with support from our readers.