A recent incident at Radio City Music Hall involving the mother of a Girl Scout is shedding light on the growing controversy of facial recognition, as critics claim it is being used to target perceived enemies — in this case, by one of the most famous companies in the country.

Kelly Conlon and her daughter came to New York City the weekend after Thanksgiving as part of a Girl Scout field trip to Radio City Music Hall to see the Christmas Spectacular show. But while her daughter, other members of the Girl Scout troop and their mothers got to go enjoy the show, Conlon wasn't allowed to do so.

That's because to Madison Square Garden Entertainment, Conlon isn't just any mom. They had identified and zeroed in on her, as security guards approached her right as he got into the lobby.

"It was pretty simultaneous, I think, to me, going through the metal detector, that I heard over an intercom or loudspeaker," she told NBC New York. "I heard them say woman with long dark hair and a grey scarf."

Get Tri-state area news and weather forecasts to your inbox. Sign up for NBC New York newsletters.

She said she was asked her name and to produce identification.

"I believe they said that our recognition picked you up," Conlon said.

A sign says facial recognition is used as a security measure to ensure safety for guests and employees. Conlon says she posed no threat, but the guards still kicked her out with the explanation that they knew she was an attorney.

"They knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them. And they told me I was not allowed to be there," said Conlon.

Conlon is an associate with the New Jersey based law firm, Davis, Saperstein and Solomon, which for years has been involved in personal injury litigation against a restaurant venue now under the umbrella of MSG Entertainment.

"I don’t practice in New York. I’m not an attorney that works on any cases against MSG," said Conlon.

But MSG said she was banned nonetheless — along with fellow attorneys in that firm and others.

"MSG instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys pursuing active litigation against the Company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved. While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adverse environment. All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy, including Davis, Saperstein and Salomon, which was notified twice," a spokesperson for MSG Entertainment said in a statement.

Critics of the NYPD's use of facial recognition technology to identify suspects say the tool is inaccurate doesn't always work on people with darker skin but the police department argue that the technology is never the sole basis for an arrest. I-Team's Jonathan Dienst reports.

"This whole scheme is a pretext for doing collective punishment on adversaries who would dare sue MSG in their multi-billion dollar network," said Sam Davis, a partner at the firm where Conlon works.

Other firms have sued over being blacklisted. Conlon said she thought a recent judge's order in one of those cases made it clear that ticketholders like her "may not be denied entry to any shows."

MSG stated that "In this particular situation, only the one attorney who chose to attend was denied entry, and the rest of of her group — including the Girl Scouts — were all able to attend and enjoy the show."

"I was just a mom taking my daughter to see a Christmas show," Conlon told the I-Team. "I did wait outside...It was embarrassing, it was mortifying."

Davis is now upping the legal ante, challenging MSG’s license with the State Liquor Authority.

"The liquor license that MSG got requires them to admit members of the public, unless there are people who would be disruptive who constitute a security threat," said Davis. "Taking a mother, separating a mother from her daughter and Girl Scouts she was watching over — and to do it under the pretext of protecting any disclosure of litigation information — is absolutely absurd. The fact they’re using facial recognition to do this is frightening. It’s un-American to do this."

A spokesperson for MSG reiterated in a statement that safety is their highest priority and that facial recognition is just one of the methods they use. MSG Entertainment also said it is confident their policy is in compliance with all applicable laws, including the New York State Liquor Authority.

Man Sues NJ Police After Wrongful Arrest With Facial Recognition. Over Thanksgiving weekend, Kelly Conlon, 44, a personal injury lawyer from Bergen County, N.J., was chaperoning her 9-year-old daughter’s Girl Scout troop on a trip into Manhattan to see the “Christmas Spectacular” at Radio City Music Hall.

Before she could even glimpse the Rockettes, however, security guards pulled Ms. Conlon aside and her New York jaunt took an Orwellian turn.

“They told me that they knew I was Kelly Conlon and that I was an attorney,” she said this week. “They knew the name of my law firm.”

The guards had identified her using a facial recognition system. They showed her a sheet saying she was on an “attorney exclusion list” created this year by MSG Entertainment, which is controlled by the Dolan family. The company owns Radio City and some of New York’s other famous performance spaces, including the Beacon Theater and Madison Square Garden, where basketball’s Knicks and hockey’s Rangers play.. A Long Island attorney says he was kicked out of a Knicks game after getting flagged by facial recognition technology at Madison Square Garden — the same system the company used to boot another lawyer from a Rockettes show.

“I was upset — we had a whole night planned out that got botched,” said lawyer Alexis Majano, 28. “I said, ‘This is ridiculous.'”

Majano — whose law firm has a pending lawsuit against Madison Square Garden Entertainment in an unrelated matter — was headed into the game against the Celtics with pals on Nov. 5 when he was stopped on an escalator, he said.

“A gentleman in a suit stopped me and said, “Are you Alexis Majano? The manager wants to speak with you,” he said. “I noticed security had blocked off the exit.”

One of the workers, who was decked out with a body cam, informed him that the conversation “was being recorded” — then began to grill him, he said.

Majano said the employee asked if he works for the law firm Sahn Ward Braff Koblenz — which recently filed a lawsuit on behalf of a fan who fell from a Skybox at Madison Square Garden during a Billy Joel concert.

3 Lawyer Alexis Majano says he was booted from a Knicks game he planned to attend with friends. sahnward.com

Majano, who works for the firm but isn’t involved in the case, said the worker had a long list of attorneys he’d apparently been instructed to kick out.

“He handed me a list of 20 to 30 pages of random names and firms. He asked me … ’Do you work for Sahn Ward? Are you an attorney?’ I said yes,” Majano said.

“They explained very briefly: Any firms with litigation against MSG are banned,” he continued. “I was shocked.”

When Majano asked the worker how the venue had identified him, “He said, ‘We caught you on facial recognition.”

“I was fairly certain they were right because I didn’t show ID — the tickets didn’t have my name on them,” he said.

The employee then forced Majano to leave, spoiling his plans for the night, Majano said.

3 Majano was stopped while entering Madison Square Garden on November 5. Getty Images

The ordeal came weeks before another lawyer, Kelly Conlon, was flagged by facial recognition technology and booted from Radio City, which is among Madison Square Garden CEO James Dolan’s holdings.

Conlon, 44, was chaperoning her 9-year-old daughter’s Girl Scout troop at the Radio City Christmas Spectacular on Nov. 27 when was refused entry despite holding a ticket.

Madison Square Garden Entertainment later said it had “instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation against the company from attending events.”

Rob Abiuso, 55, a partner at the firm where Majano works, said he’s now considering taking legal action on behalf of Majano.

“This is palpably improper,” he said. “Prevent me from going in, I’m the attorney [on the case],” he said. “But to indict the entire firm?”

“I’m seriously contemplating commencing an action against them,” he said. “I’m furious.”

MSG Entertainment told The Post Wednesday the policy still stands.

3 Madison Square Garden CEO James Dolan’s facial recognition tech also spotted an attorney in litigation trying to take in a show at Radio City Music Hall. for the NY POST

“All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy. We continue to make clear that impacted attorneys will be welcomed back to our venues upon resolution of the litigation,” it said in a statement.

“We have always made it clear to our guests and to the public that we use facial recognition as one of our tools to provide a safe and secure environment for our customers and ourselves,” the company added.. Kelly Conlon, an attorney from New Jersey, says she wasn’t allowed to see a Rockettes show at Radio City Music Hall after she was identified by a facial recognition system, according to a report from NBC New York. Conlon told the outlet that guards approached her while she was in the building’s lobby and said she wasn’t allowed to be there because of her connection to a legal case against the company that owns the hall.

“I believe they said that our recognition picked you up,” she told NBC, saying that she was asked to identify herself and that “they knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them.” She says she ended up waiting outside while her daughter watched the show with other members of her Girl Scout troop.

Radio City has a sign saying that the venue “a variety of security measures, including Facial Recognition which uses Biometric Identifier Information”

Madison Square Garden Entertainment (or MSG), the owner of Radio City and many other venues, hasn’t confirmed whether it was facial recognition that alerted security to Conlon’s presence. However, it does make it clear that it uses the tech. “We have always made it clear to our guests and to the public that we use facial recognition as one of our tools to provide a safe and secure environment and we will continue to use it to protect against the entry of individuals who we have prohibited from entering our venues,” the company said in a statement sent to The Verge by Mikyl Cordova, a spokesperson for the company.

MSG refused to provide details about its system, such as whose facial recognition tech it uses. There are many companies that develop these kinds of systems, with some selling them to businesses and governments. However, the company has a long history with facial recognition systems — it was testing them by early 2018, according to a report from The New York Times. As NBC shows in its report, the company has signage posted at the venue to tell people that security uses facial recognition, as it’s legally required to do.

It’s possible there are other ways Conlon could have identified before the show; if she’d been asked to present her identification or tickets with her name on them at any point, it would’ve been an opportunity for other security systems to flag her. But she told NBC that she was picked out pretty much as soon as she went through the metal detector.

The incident stems from the fact that Conlon is a lawyer at a firm that’s involved in a lawsuit against MSG. While she told NBC that she hasn’t worked on the case, MSG’s policy “precludes attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation against the company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved,” according to Cordova. Its reasoning is that “litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment.” Cordova says that “all impacted attorneys were notified of the policy” and that Conlon’s firm was notified twice.

MSG’s stance has not gone over well in some courts

The policy has been controversial from a legal standpoint. When lawyers from another case brought it up, Judge Kathaleen McCormick — who presided over two different Elon Musk cases this year as he tried to get out out of buying Twitter and argued over his pay package with Tesla shareholders — called it “the stupidest thing I’ve ever read,” according to documents obtained by Reuters.

Another judge in a separate case ruled that “plaintiffs may not be denied entry into any shows where they possess a valid ticket” while noting that MSG did have the right not to sell them tickets in the first place. The company didn’t answer The Verge’s questions about whether it had systems in place that would’ve prevented Conlon from purchasing a ticket, either through its systems or from resellers.

Despite the ruling, MSG sent another letter to law firms saying that they weren’t allowed onto its premises and that it could revoke their tickets, according to Reuters. It seems likely that the question of whether MSG’s ban is allowed will be litigated in many courtrooms over the next who knows how long. That probably won’t be the case for its use of facial recognition itself — in New York, it’s legal for businesses to do so, and reports have shown that the NYC government has received millions in funding for its own surveillance systems. (It has curtailed facial recognition in at least a few instances, though; schools currently aren’t supposed to use it.)

Even as they become more commonplace, facial recognition systems aren’t accepted everywhere. While their ability to scan a large number of people quickly and attempt to match faces to an identity in a database makes them attractive to governments and businesses, there are members of the public and privacy advocates that have pushed back against their use.. A mother bought tickets to attend a Christmas show at Radio City Music Hall — but due to her job, she was refused entry.

Kelly Conlon, a lawyer for a New Jersey based firm, took a trip to New York City the weekend after Thanksgiving to see the Rockettes with her daughter and her daughter's Girl Scout Troop, according to NBC New York. However, shortly after entering the lobby, she was told by security guards that she needed to leave.

"They knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them. And they told me I was not allowed to be there," Conlon told the outlet, which reported that a sign at the venue says facial recognition technology is used to help ensure the safety of guests and employees.

Although Conlon says she isn't personally involved in any cases against Madison Square Garden Entertainment, which operates Radio City Music Hall, her law firm is, according to NBC New York.

The outlet reported that her firm, Davis, Saperstein and Solomon, is involved in ongoing personal injury litigation against a restaurant venue owned by MSG Entertainment.

MSG Entertainment has said they have a "straightforward policy" behind the ban, which applies to a number of firms and attorneys involved in ongoing litigation against the company.

"MSG instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation against the Company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved," the company said in a statement obtained by PEOPLE.

"While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment. All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy, including Davis, Saperstein & Salomon, which was notified twice," the company added.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free weekly newsletter to get the biggest news of the week delivered to your inbox every Friday.

Both Conlon and MSG Entertainment say she was the only person in her group who was not allowed to attend the show.

"I was caught off-guard – I just complied with what they asked me to do and I left my daughter inside the venue with her troops," Conlon, who was chaperoning the event, told The New York Post.

However, MSG Entertainment went on to say in their statement that Conlon was "notified in advance that she would be denied entry."

"In this particular situation, only the one attorney who chose to attend despite being notified in advance that she would be denied entry, was not permitted to enter, and the rest of her group – including the Girl Scouts – were all able to attend and enjoy the show," the company said.

As for their facial recognition technology, they said "we have always made it clear to our guests and to the public that we use facial recognition as one of our tools to provide a safe and secure environment and we will continue to use it to protect against the entry of individuals who we have prohibited from entering our venues."



"Facial recognition technology is a useful tool widely used throughout the country, including the sports and entertainment industry, retail locations, casinos and airports to protect the safety of the people that visit and work at those locations," the statement read. "Our venues are worldwide destinations and several sit on major transit hubs in the heart of New York."

Speaking with NBC New York, Conlon claimed that she thought a recent court ruling made it so that ticket holders "may not be denied entry to any shows."

"This whole scheme is a pretext for doing collective punishment on adversaries who would dare sue MSG in their multi-billion dollar network," Sam Davis, a partner at the firm where Conlon works, told the outlet.

"This situation should not happen again," Davis told PEOPLE in a statement. "It was terrifying for Kelly."

In a statement, a spokesperson for MSG told NBC New York that they felt confident their policies were in compliance with all laws.. . Home Daily News Girl Scouts mom is ousted from Rockettes…

Technology

Girl Scouts mom is ousted from Rockettes show after facial recognition IDs her as lawyer in banned law firm

An exterior view of the Radio City Music Hall in New York on Dec. 9. Photo by Anthony Behar/Sipa USA via the Associated Press.

A New Jersey mom taking her daughter to see a show featuring the Rockettes as part of a Girl Scouts field trip was recently ousted from the Radio City Music Hall because facial recognition technology identified her as a lawyer at a law firm that sued a related venue.

The lawyer, Kelly Conlon, is an associate at Davis, Saperstein & Salomon in New Jersey, which has sued a restaurant owned by Radio City owner the Madison Square Garden Entertainment Corp.

She told NBC New York that a security guard stopped her in the Radio City lobby when she was there the weekend after Thanksgiving. Ars Technica noted the story.

“They knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them. And they told me I was not allowed to be there,” Conlon told NBC New York.

Conlon waited outside, while her daughter saw the show.

Conlon said she is not personally involved in cases against Madison Square Garden Entertainment, and she doesn’t practice in New York. She told NBC New York that the experience was embarrassing and “mortifying.”

Madison Square Garden Entertainment sent this statement to NBC New York: “MSG instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys pursuing active litigation against the company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved. While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adverse environment. All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy, including Davis, Saperstein & Salomon, which was notified twice.”

Sam Davis, a partner at Davis Saperstein, told NBC New York that the ban “is absolutely absurd,” and the use of facial recognition technology to implement it is “frightening.” He plans to challenge Madison Square Garden Entertainment’s liquor license on the ground that it requires Madison Square Garden Entertainment to admit members of the public, unless they are disruptive or constitute a security threat.

Madison Square Garden Entertainment told NBC New York that safety is its highest priority, and facial recognition is just one method that it uses. The company also said it complies with all applicable laws, including New York liquor laws.

Conlon told NBC New York that she thought that a recent ruling in the case of another blacklisted firm made clear that ticket holders can’t be denied entry to shows. She may have been referring to a ruling in the case of a lawyer whose season tickets to New York Knicks games were revoked because of a suit against Madison Square Garden on behalf of ticket resellers.

In that suit, Judge Lyle E. Frank of New York ruled in November that New York civil rights law requires venues to allow entry to nonsporting events to anyone age 21 or older who is behaving appropriately and holding a valid ticket. But Madison Square Garden can refuse to sell tickets, and it can revoke tickets up until the time that they are presented at the door, Frank said.

After the decision, Madison Square Garden sent letters to lawyers with suits against it asserting that tickets that they obtain are revoked and invalid. The company also said it is appealing Frank’s decision.

On Nov. 22, a New York appeals court temporarily amended Frank’s decision, so that it applies only to the plaintiff who challenged Madison Square Garden Entertainment’s policy, Larry Hutcher, and to his firm, Davidoff Hutcher & Citron, Law360 reports. The narrowed ruling remains in effect pending a decision by the full appellate panel.. Facial recognition technology is everywhere today, from airports to the phone in your pocket. One place you might not expect to encounter it is a popular concert venue like Radio City Music Hall in New York. However, Madison Square Garden Entertainment, the operator of this and other facilities, recently used facial recognition to single out and eject a woman from its famed Rockettes show. Her crime? Being a lawyer at the wrong law firm.

Kelly Conlon says she purchased tickets for her and her daughter to see the Radio City Music Hall Christmas show as part of a Girl Scout outing. Upon entering, Conlon says she heard an announcement over the PA system describing her physical appearance. Moments later, security stopped her and asked for identification, telling her the venue's facial recognition technology had "picked [her] up."

Before even talking to Conlon, security knew her name and, more importantly, her employer. Conlon is an associate for New Jersey law firm Davis, Saperstein & Salomon, which has been involved in a personal injury lawsuit against a restaurant owned by MSG Entertainment for several years. It turns out that MSG Entertainment has a little-known policy to bar attorneys who work for firms engaged in litigation against it. So, Conlon was separated from her daughter and forced to wait outside(Opens in a new window).

MSG Entertainment says it has been transparent about this policy with the affected companies. In particular, it has sent two notices about it to Davis, Saperstein & Salomon. However, Conlon notes that she doesn't have anything to do with the case. MSG has been using facial recognition at security checkpoints since at least 2018.

News of this encounter has privacy advocates up in arms. Evan Greer, director of Fight for the Future, has called for this practice to be banned nationally. Most action on facial recognition focuses on preventing governments and law enforcement from expanding its use, but private enterprise has flown under the radar. Fight for the Future advocates for all "places of public accommodation" to be free of facial recognition technology, which can be used by businesses to preemptively ban people who may have affiliations with competitors or, as in this case, legal rivals.

In the wake of her removal from Radio City Music Hall, Conlon is going after MSG Entertainment via its liquor license. Conlon points out that the license requires MSG to admit members of the public unless they are disruptive or a threat to safety.. Madison Square Garden Entertainment Corp. (MSG Entertainment) is using facial recognition technology to eject lawyers suing them from shows. According to a report by Rolling Stone, MSG Entertainment, who owns Madison Square Garden as well as Radio City Music Hall and the Beacon Theatre, ejected lawyer Barbara Hart and her husband from a Brandi Carlile show on October 22. Hart is an attorney at Grant & Eisenhofer, who is currently suing MSG Entertainment as part of a class action lawsuit.

"There's a wealth of possibility to use technology to the betterment of our society," said Hart to Rolling Stone. "But my real feeling here is that this case is demonstrative of the abuse of technology, akin to what we see with Elon Musk kicking people off of Twitter just because they can."

A similar situation happened to Kelly Conlon, an associate at a firm suing MSG Entertainment, as she was thrown out of a Radio City Rockettes show at Radio City Music Hall she was attending with her daughter and Girl Scout Troop.

But surely this can't just be the new dystopian hell we live in, right? They're not actually using facial recognition technology to toss anyone opposing them from shows, right? Unfortunately MSG Entertainment provided a statement to Rolling Stone confirming that is exactly the case.

"MSG instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation against the Company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved. While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment."

The only word that comes to mind here is definitely "dystopian." That someone who was hired to do a job gets tossed from a show they paid to go to because the company they're suing has decided they shouldn't be there, and used facial recognition technology to identify them. Woof.. A Girl Scout troop trip to see the Rockettes in New York City didn't go as planned for mom Kelly Conlon, who was turned away at the door of Radio City Music Hall because a facial recognition system pinned her as a prohibited person.

The reason, Conlon told NBC New York, was because she's an associate at New Jersey law firm Davis, Saperstein and Solomon. She doesn't practice law in New York, but her firm's offices there have been involved in years-long personal injury litigation against a restaurant now owned by Madison Square Garden Entertainment (MSG).

MSG also handles affairs at Radio City Music Hall and so, despite her lack of involvement in cases involving MSG, Conlon was escorted off the premises.

"They knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them. And they told me I was not allowed to be there," Conlon said.

MSG told NBC New York that it has a policy of prohibiting attorneys involved in litigation against the biz from attending events at its venues, and that Conlon's firm had been warned twice about staff not attending MSG events.

"In this particular situation, only the one attorney who chose to attend despite being notified in advance that she would be denied entry, was not permitted to enter," MSG told The Register in an email.

MSG further told us Conlon's firm was sent emails on October 28 and November 14, and that it has no way to know which lawyers are involved in litigation. As such, MSG makes total bans on all attorneys at a firm.

The company also noted that MSG's use of facial recognition is clearly advertised to guests, adding "we will continue to use it to protect against the entry of individuals who we have prohibited from entering our venues."

Welcome to the garden of surveillance

Facial recognition has been in use at Madison Square Garden - the venue itself - since at least 2018, when The New York Times reported the arena was scanning the faces of customers. Representatives of Madison Square Garden claimed at the time it improved security and helped "provide a safe and wonderful experience" for guests.

Privacy advocates disagree on the effectiveness of facial recognition, and have prevailed in some cases attempting to restrict the use of such technology. Clearview AI, a startup that scraped images from social media pages to build a facial ID database, settled a lawsuit with the ACLU earlier this year that included a promise to restrict sale of its database to US businesses.

Clearview was also forced to cough up millions in fines to the UK's privacy watchdog for scraping the web for face data.

MSG didn't tell us which facial recognition software it uses, but said that only individuals it prohibits from entering its venues are in the database.

The failure rate of facial recognition - especially when it comes to identifying women and minorities - has been well demonstrated, and Congress even decided it was a big enough deal to hold hearings on in 2019.

Regardless of the law, Conlon's fellows at the firm aren't letting it slide, and partner Sam Davis believes they might have the right angle to get MSG to stop barring entry: Threaten the group's liquor license.

According to Davis, MSG's license requires it to admit all members of the public who aren't deemed to be disruptive or a security threat. "Separating a mother from her daughter and Girl Scouts she was watching over — and to do it under the pretext of protecting any disclosure of litigation information — is absolutely absurd," Davis said.

"This whole scheme is a pretext for doing collective punishment on adversaries who would dare sue MSG in their multi-billion dollar network."

"We are confident that our policy is in compliance with all applicable laws including the New York State Liquor Authority," told us. ®. A lawyer employed by a firm involved in a personal injury claim against the operator of Radio City Music Hall said she was barred from attending the Rockettes Christmas show at the famous Manhattan venue after being picked up by facial recognition technology at the entrance.

Kelly Conlon told NBC New York she and her daughter came to the city from New Jersey last month as part of a Girl Scout field trip to see the show – but she was prevented from entering.

Conlon said: “It was pretty simultaneous, I think, to me, going through the metal detector, that I heard over an intercom or loudspeaker, I heard them say, ‘Woman with long dark hair and a grey scarf.’”

Conlon said she was asked her name and to produce identification.

“I believe they said that ‘Our recognition picked you up,’” she said. “They knew my name before I told them. They knew the firm I was associated with before I told them. And they told me I was not allowed to be there.”

Conlon is an attorney with Davis, Saperstein and Salomon, a law firm involved in a personal injury claim against MSG Entertainment, which operates Radio City Music Hall.

A sign at the venue says facial recognition is used as a security measure. Conlon said she posed no threat and was not involved in the personal injury case.

In a statement, MSG said it had “a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys pursuing active litigation against the company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved.

“While we understand this policy is disappointing to some … all impacted attorneys were notified of the policy, including Davis, Saperstein and Salomon, which was notified twice.”

MSG also said its priority was safety and it was confident it was “in compliance with all applicable laws”.

It added: “In this particular situation, only the one attorney who chose to attend was denied entry, and the rest of of her group – including the Girl Scouts – were all able to attend and enjoy the show.”

Conlon told NBC: “I was just a mom taking my daughter to see a Christmas show. I did wait outside … It was embarrassing, it was mortifying.”

Sam Davis, a partner at Davis, Saperstein and Salomon, said: “This whole scheme is a pretext for doing collective punishment on adversaries who would dare sue MSG in their multibillion-dollar network.

“… The liquor license that MSG got requires them to admit members of the public, unless there are people who would be disruptive who constitute a security threat … Separating a mother from her daughter and Girl Scouts she was watching over – and to do it under the pretext of protecting any disclosure of litigation information – is absolutely absurd.

“The fact they’re using facial recognition to do this is frightening. It’s un-American to do this.”. An attorney from a law firm suing the parent company of Radio City Music Hall was kicked out of the venue after facial recognition technology identified her when she tried to see a Rockettes performance with her daughter and a pack of Girl Scouts.

Kelly Conlon, a senior associate with the New Jersey personal injury firm Davis, Saperstein and Salomon — which is representing a client suing a restaurant owned by the parent company, MSG Entertainment — told NBC New York that security guards approached her and asked for identification as soon as she arrived on the weekend after Thanksgiving. The guards ultimately turned her away from the show even though she is not involved in her firm's litigation against the company. Conlon’s daughter and the rest of the Girl Scouts were able to attend the performance, she told the station.

“I was just a mom taking my daughter to see a Christmas show,” she told NBC New York. “I did wait outside. ... It was embarrassing. It was mortifying.”

A partner in the firm, Sam Davis, told NBC New York that Conlon’s experience highlights the potential impacts of the widespread use of facial recognition technology, which has come under fire for contributing to wrongful arrests as a policing tool and surveillance of people of color and other more vulnerable populations without their consent.

“Taking a mother, separating a mother from her daughter and Girl Scouts she was watching over — and to do it under the pretext of protecting any disclosure of litigation information — is absolutely absurd,” Davis told NBC New York. “The fact they’re using facial recognition to do this is frightening. It’s un-American to do this.”

The Rockettes perform at Radio City Music Hall in New York in 2019. Craig Ruttle / AP file

MSG Entertainment, which also operates Madison Square Garden and several other major venues, introduced a policy in June barring lawyers from firms suing it from setting foot in its venues while litigation is ongoing.

About two weeks before Conlon was barred, her firm filed a complaint against the company's policy with the New York State Liquor Authority, alleging that MSG Entertainment’s liquor license requires it to admit members of the public to its venues, other than people who may be disruptive and cause security threats, they told NBC New York.

A spokesperson for the liquor authority confirmed to NBC News that the agency opened the investigation, “as we do whenever we receive credible complaints,” adding that state law mandates that “all retail licensees allow the general public access into their premises.”

Davis, Saperstein and Salomon did not respond to questions from NBC News, including whether Conlon and other lawyers at the firm were made aware of MSG Entertainment’s policy. A spokesperson for MSG Entertainment said it notified the firm of the rule twice in recent months — including on the day the firm filed the complaint with state liquor regulators.

MSG Entertainment told NBC News in a statement that facial recognition is just one of the methods it uses to ensure safety, adding that officials are confident their policy complies with all applicable laws.

The spokesperson declined to share how the company obtains data used in its facial recognition technology; Davis, Saperstein and Salomon includes photos of its attorneys on its website. The spokesperson added that a sign outside Radio City Music Hall informs visitors that facial recognition technology is among the security measures it has in place.

The spokesperson called the policy “straightforward” and said attorneys at firms pursuing litigation against it are welcome at its venues once the litigation is resolved.

“While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment,” MSG Entertainment’s statement continued. “All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy, including Davis, Saperstein and Salomon, which was notified twice. In this particular situation, only the one attorney who chose to attend despite being notified in advance that she would be denied entry, was not permitted to enter, and the rest of her group — including the Girl Scouts — were all able to attend and enjoy the show.”

The spokesperson added that the policy applies to all attorneys at affected firms because the company doesn’t know which one are working on litigation against it and because it prevents the policy from targeting individual attorneys.

The policy has come under fire from several firms involved in lawsuits against it, some of whom have unsuccessfully challenged the ban in court; at a hearing last month, Chancellor Kathaleen McCormick of Delaware Chancery Court called the policy “the stupidest thing I’ve ever read,” Reuters reported.

New York court records show that more than 20 active lawsuits are pending against MSG Entertainment and its properties in the state.. The problem with going to battle against thousands of lawyers is that it is likely to lead to lawsuits. And then the battle will inevitably head to their home turf.

Since last summer, MSG Entertainment, which operates Madison Square Garden and Radio City Music Hall, along with other venues and restaurants, has sent letters to adversarial lawyers at around 90 firms: “Neither you, nor any other attorney employed at your firm, may enter the Company’s venues until final resolution of the litigation.” The purpose, according to MSG Entertainment officials, is to prevent the collection of evidence “outside proper litigation discovery channels.”

Benjamin Noren, an employment lawyer, called that “ludicrous.” His firm is representing ticket resellers in a lawsuit against the company, and he is on the banned list though he is not involved in the case. He called the ban “a transparent effort” by MSG Entertainment and its chief executive, James Dolan, “to stop attorneys from suing them.”

A ban based on employment status alone would generally be difficult to enforce, because someone else could always buy the ticket. But MSG has effectively deployed facial recognition, a technology it has been using for security reasons since 2018; over Thanksgiving weekend, MSG’s technology spotted and turned away a lawyer accompanying her daughter’s Girl Scout troop to see the Rockettes at Radio City Music Hall.. Lawmakers and privacy advocates are calling on the owners of Madison Square Garden to end the use of facial recognition technology on its fans.

Sen. Kristen Gonzalez joined advocates sounding off last weekend, demanding that MSG Entertainment seize the use of the technology on fans.

“It’s incredibly upsetting to see not only another example of someone who is wealthy and powerful, using that power to target people but to also that abuse of surveillance technology,” said Gonzalez.

This dates back to an incident where attorneys involved with lawsuits against MSG Entertainment were banned from its arena and Radio City Music Hall.

Lawmakers say venues should not have the power to weaponize facial recognition to discriminate against patrons and steal personal information.

A spokesperson for MSG provided News 12 with the following statement:

“The facial recognition technology system does not retain images of individuals, with the exception of those who were previously advised they are prohibited from entering our venues, or whose previous misconduct- in our venues has identified them as a security risk.”. He’s used it to bar the lawyers — now Madison Square Garden CEO James Dolan is targeting elected officials for bashing his controversial use of facial recognition software to screen attendees.

West Side Assemblyman Tony Simone says MSG yanked an invitation to attend an upcoming event after he criticized Dolan’s practice of using the controversial tech against legal enemies.

“This could lead to corporate abuse. If Jim Dolan doesn’t like you, you don’t come to his events,” Simone told The Post Tuesday.

“What, I’m not gonna see Madonna in a year, because I said something bad about the company?”

Simone was one of several local pols who hit MSG at a Sunday press conference over its use of facial recognition software to eject lawyers from the Garden and Radio City Music Hall who work for firms tied to litigation against the company.

The freshman legislator said the situation turned ironic when an MSG representative called him to say they didn’t “feel it would be the appropriate time” for Simone, the first LGBTQ person elected to rep the district, to attend the NHL-sponsored “Hockey is for Everyone” event.

4 The facial recognition software at Madison Square Garden has previously been used to target lawyers. Matthew McDermott

“I was excited to drop the puck on Hockey Night,” Simone said. “Then to be excluded just because I want to speak out against the policy kind of proves our point.”

Simone said it is “unclear” whether he is blocked from attending other events at MSG venues. “I have not been told I am banned, was just disinvited from this event,” he said.

An MSG representative said Simone was not banned from future events.

“We are disappointed he has chosen to side with a small group of attorneys defending ticket scalpers and other money grabbing schemes, rather than honor our LGBTQ community and the underprivileged kids of the Garden of Dreams Foundation at the January 27th Rangers Pride Night game,” the rep said.

Simone’s plight was first reported Tuesday by local newspaper Chelsea News.

4 Manhattan Assemblyman Tony Simone was told not to come to a Madison Square Garden event after criticizing CEO James Dolan over his use of facial recognition software. Facebook/Tony Simone

“MSG instituted a straightforward policy that precludes attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation against the Company from attending events at our venues until that litigation has been resolved. While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment,” a spokesperson previously told The Post.

Four attorneys who worked for firms tied to litigation against MSG say they were spotted by facial recognition software and told to leave by security while trying to attend events in their off hours.

4 MSG CEO James Dolan (seated center) is using facial recognition software to eject lawyers working for firms tied to litigation against him. for the NY POST

“That’s dystopian. How would you know if other corporate leaders won’t start using this? How do we know if they are already using it? Come on,” Simone said.

Kelly Conlon — who was denied entry to a Rockettes show because her law firm is suing Madison Square Garden Entertainment — is considering a suit against MSG, arguing that use of the technology is an invasion of privacy.

Local pols like Simone noted that MSG receives a range of public support, including a state tax abatement as well as an expiring city permit that allows the Garden to seat more than 2,500 people despite city zoning rules.

“With these factors in mind, we trust MSG Entertainment will act accordingly and immediately cease the use of personal biometric technology for non-security purposes,” reads the Jan. 15 letter to Dolan signed by Simone and several other pols.

4 A state lawmaker was told he was not welcome at an NHL-sponsored “Hockey is for Everyone” event after criticizing Madison Square Garden Entertainment. NHLI via Getty Images

US Rep. Jerrold Nadler, state Sens. Liz Krueger, Brad Hoylman-Sigal, Kristen Gonzalez and Brian Kavanagh as well as Assemblyman Alex Bores and Councilman Erik Bottcher also signed the letter.

Dolan could end the controversy with one simple move, Simone noted Tuesday.

“I’m hoping that instead of being petty, or bully, he just stops the policy,” Simone said. “It’s silly, like don’t be so sensitive.”. The future of facial recognition use by private companies in the United States could boil down to who emerges victorious in an ongoing dispute between a collection of lawyers and a petty, authoritarian New York billionaire. The place: one of America’s most famous venues, Madison Square Garden. The owner: James Dolan.

Advertisement

Over the past three months, multiple lawyers in the New York area have come forward with dramatic accounts of being denied entry into Madison Square Garden and other venues also owned by MSG Entertainment. The common factor in their stories? Each of them were spotted by the company’s facial recognition system. That system was looking for lawyers from an estimated 90 law firms with active litigation against Madison Square Garden or MSG who were placed on a list denying them entry into the venues. The venue justifies banning the attorneys, many of whom aren’t personally involved in the lawsuits, because their presence somehow “creates an inherently adverse environment.” New York’s Attorney General, on the other hand, says that practice may violate state civil rights laws. Madison Square Garden first rolled out facial recognition systems to its venues in 2018 with the stated goal of increasing security.

“This is bad, and it’s just one example of how facial recognition could be used to infringe on peoples’ rights,” Fight for the Future Director Evan Greer said in a statement. “This technology puts music fans, sports fans, and others at risk of being unjustly detained, harassed, judged, or even deported.”

Madison Square Garden’s owner says he’s not going to stop using the technology any time soon. Here’s everything we know about the Madison Square Garden facial recognition saga so far.. Last week, the New York Attorney General’s office sent Madison Square Garden Entertainment a letter demanding answers. The state’s top law enforcement agency wants to know more about how the company operating Radio City Music Hall and the storied arena where the NBA’s Knicks play uses a face recognition system to deny entry to certain people, and in particular lawyers representing clients in dispute with Madison Square Garden. The letter says that because the ban is thought to cover staff at 90 law firms, it may exclude thousands of people and deter them from taking on cases "including sexual harassment or employment discrimination claims.”

Since the face recognition system became widely known in recent weeks, MSG’s management has stood squarely behind the idea of checking faces at the door with algorithms. In an unsigned statement, the company says its system is not an attack on lawyers, though some are “ambulance chasers and money grabbers.”

The venue’s use of face recognition underscores the recent spread of the technology at sporting events. The trend is driven by a desire to quickly authenticate ticket holders’ identity and get them into stadiums and concert venues. But civil rights groups warn that face recognition installed with seemingly benign intent can be adapted to other, more concerning uses.

MSG started using face recognition to look for people deemed security threats in 2018. That same year, the New York Mets and New York Yankees were among nine ballparks in a biometric identification trial between Major League Baseball and Clear, a company that offers fast-track identity verification at 50 airports in the Canada and the US.

The first Mets face recognition trial was limited to checking the identity of players and staff entering the stadium, but at the end of the 2021 season the Mets started using the technology with a select number of season ticket holders. When the 2023 season starts in March, in what the Mets call a first for an MLB team, all fans will be able to use face recognition to get into Citi Field.

The Mets want to continue finding other use cases for the technology, such as paying with your face for food and drinks, says VP of technology Oscar Fernandez, but the entry program is not designed to limit access to any group. “That’s not something this program is at all being applied to,” he says. “This is all about using your ticket to get into the stadium.”. Madison Square Garden Entertainment Corp. recently drew considerable criticism over its use of facial recognition technology to identify opposing counsel and prevent their access to its properties and entertainment venues.

The entertainment conglomerate justifies its policy by saying it doesn’t exclude attorneys “based on the protected classes identified in state and federal civil rights laws.”

While the policy may follow the letter of New York City’s law, it avoids its spirit by using scanning software to discriminatorily target attorneys at law firms litigating against it—even those not directly involved in that legal action.

This has spurred an important debate over which has more merit: a corporation’s property rights or an attorney’s privacy and First Amendment rights.

Inequity and Bias

The company that operates Madison Square Garden and Radio City Music Hall claims it employs a targeted system that uses images of attorneys from targeted law firms’ websites to “train” its system.

But the technology still can’t guarantee freedom from algorithmic discrimination. Its use in this manner poses a potential chilling effect on both free speech and access to justice if an attorney might decline client representation to avoid application of this policy.

The conglomerate’s policy fails to account for the inequities and algorithmic biases that may be inherent in that technology.

Facial recognition systems that aren’t adequately trained with diverse data can lead to algorithmic biases. Unfairness then seeps into a wide range of applications—from seeking employment or securing a loan to being misidentified for a crime.

Regulation Required

Without regulation, such dystopian applications of the technology may proliferate. The ability to create and technologically enforce an enemies list is inimical to a healthy democracy.

In 2019, Congress was poised to take action on the Commercial Facial Recognition Privacy Act, which would have prohibited entities from collecting, processing, storing, or controlling facial recognition data.

This is unless such entities provided documentation that explained the capabilities and limitations and obtained explicit affirmative consent from end users to use such technology after providing notice about facial-recognition data use.

The bill didn’t pass once the pandemic diverted attention to other matters. While federal legislation remains pending, New York advanced its own regulation to curb potential discriminatory practices.

The New York State Bar Association is also studying the impact of facial recognition software and has formed a working group to investigate the technology’s effect on a lawyer’s ability to represent clients without fear of retribution.

Regulation is necessary to strike a balance between the rights of the few and the public good. Such regulation can proscribe the deliberate targeting of an individual’s right to free speech, privacy, access to justice, and personal safety.

Background

Facial recognition owes its genesis to the development of computer vision in the 1960s. In the early 1990s, two US government agencies inaugurated a facial recognition program to encourage development in the commercial market. The project created a database of 2,413 still facial images representing 856 people.

This representative sample set triggers potential algorithmic biases. For instance, when Google launched facial recognition in its photo application, it miscategorized a Black couple in a White person’s photo album as “gorillas.”

In 2019, the National Institute of Standards and Technology studied several facial recognition algorithms and found they were 10 to 100 times less accurate at identifying a Black face than a White one. While the technology may have evolved over the last few years, it clearly isn’t infallible.

Benefits and Risks

Proponents note that the technology has beneficial applications. For example, doctors have used the technology to diagnose certain diseases detectable through facial expressions.

The Department of Homeland Security deploys the technology at airports to enforce the No Fly List. Mobile phone manufacturers use the technology for biometric access to smartphone devices. A professor has used facial recognition to detect boredom among his students.

Though widely deployed across a variety of disciplines and industries, facial recognition technology remains largely unregulated. As a result, these systems have the potential to impinge on the constitutional right to privacy, surveilling individuals’ movements without their knowledge or consent.

These systems have also been deployed for nefarious purposes, such as online harassment and cyber-stalking. Hackers have manipulated facial recognition to commit fraud and identity theft. Law enforcement has used these systems to target protesters, posing a threat to the constitutional right to peaceful assembly.

Increasing Private-Sector Use

In the wake of George Floyd’s murder in 2020, several states and municipalities banned or suspended the use of facial recognition systems.

A handful of large technology companies also announced temporary bans on sales to police departments—IBM Corp., Amazon.com Inc., and Microsoft Corp. Further, Clearview AI announced that it wouldn’t offer the technology to certain countries known to abuse its use.

While law enforcement use has been curtailed because of these actions, facial recognition technology has exploded in the private sector.

Leaders in the field such as NEC Corp. and Clearview AI have deployed their systems worldwide to various groups, including immigration control agencies, banks, entertainment and conference venues, and stadiums.

Increased unregulated private company use highlights the urgency for federal and state legislative action. Without legal guardrails, potential benign use may be outweighed by more ominous applications that impinge on privacy rights and lead to discrimination.

This article does not necessarily reflect the opinion of Bloomberg Industry Group, Inc., the publisher of Bloomberg Law and Bloomberg Tax, or its owners.

Write for Us: Author Guidelines

Author Information

Vivian Wesson is executive vice president, corporate secretary, and general counsel for the Board of Pensions of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.). She also chairs the New York State Bar Association’s Committee on Attorney Professionalism.. Walking into the local bodega, passing through the subway turnstiles and going to a show at Madison Square Garden are all regular New York City occurrences.

They’re also situations in which New Yorkers’ faces could end up on a computer screen or get scanned for biometrics — all without their consent.

In recent weeks, Madison Square Garden owner James Dolan’s use of facial recognition at the venue has drawn new scrutiny to the technology. Dolan has been using the technology to ban attorneys involved in litigation against him from entering the arena.

It's not just privacy or accountability issues, however, that are raising red flags for critics of the technology. Opponents say there are racial discrepancies — not only in where this technology is used, but in the rate at which it misidentifies people of color.

Now, activists and lawmakers are trying to sound the alarm on the technology’s potential to cause harm, particularly to brown and Black New Yorkers, before its use becomes even more widespread.

Manhattan state Sen. Brad Hoylman-Sigal, a Democrat, is working on legislation in Albany that would put a pause on the use of facial recognition technology by law enforcement until usage guidelines are established, including a framework for the disposal of the collected images and data.

“With facial recognition technology, essentially everyone is a suspect,” Hoylman-Sigal said in an interview with NY1. “When you walk into a venue like Madison Square Garden, your face is scanned. Not just your face, though, I should add; also your expression, your feelings, some facial recognition technology can actually lip read. All of that information is stored.”

“Where is it used after, say, Jim Dolan screens you as you walk into a Knicks game?” he asked. “That really is concerning to me and other public officials.”

'Automating the bias'

The NYPD, for its part, has deployed facial recognition technology since at least 2011. But details on how that technology is used remain murky, and its accuracy has been called into question by critics.

Researchers have found that the technology is more likely to misidentify people of color, trans people, and women than middle-aged white men.

One 2019 study titled “Racial Faces in the Wild: Reducing Racial Bias by Information Maximization Adaptation Network” found that four major commercial facial recognition tools and four state-of-the-art facial recognition tools misidentified white faces in pair matching 10% of the time, while Black and Asian faces were misidentified nearly twice as often.

A study by the National Institute of Standards and Technology also released in 2019 indicated higher error rates for pair matching of Black and Asian faces, with error rates up to 100 times higher for Black and Asian people than for white people on certain facial recognition systems.

And a Massachusetts Institute of Technology study in 2018 found the rate of error was highest when it came to dark-skinned Black women.

“Essentially, for those women, the system might as well have been guessing gender at random,” MIT said in a news release about the study.

Opponents argue that in a city that has a history of targeting Muslims after the Sept. 11, 2001 terror attacks and using racist law enforcement practices like “stop and frisk,” the use of facial recognition technology is essentially a way to codify prejudice.

In 2013, a federal judge ruled that the use of “stop and frisk” was racially discriminatory and unconstitutional under the Fourth and 14th amendments.

“When we think about the average human who has a certain level of bias, we can think about how creating technology — especially facial recognition technology — [it] is a man-made creation and so it's automating the bias that is already there,” Attiya Latif, a NYC-based staff organizer with Amnesty International, said.

New Yorkers living in areas at greater risk of stop-and-frisk policing are more likely to be exposed to facial recognition technology, according to research conducted by Amnesty International.

The human rights organization also found that in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, there was a higher concentration of facial recognition-compatible CCTV, or video surveillance, cameras in areas with a higher proportion of nonwhite residents.

In 2019, Gothamist reported that Staten Island District Attorney Michael McMahon purchased Clearview AI technology.

The facial recognition software differs from traditional forms of technology by allowing users to search for potential face matches from sites such as YouTube, Facebook, LinkedIn and Venmo, as opposed to solely relying on government databases of mugshots and driver’s licenses.

Records revealed under the Freedom of Information Law request by the Legal Aid Society showed that the Staten Island DA’s Office paid $10,000 in May of 2019 for 11 employees to use Clearview’s services for one year.

Elected officials condemned the use of this software and called for the immediate halt of its use.

“Facial recognition technology like Clearview AI has the capacity to be not a tool for public safety, but a threat to it,” Public AdvocateJumaane Williams wrote in a statement.

Cost concerns

Critics have also raised concerns about how much money the NYPD spends on the technology.

Privacy advocates like Albert Fox Cahn, the executive director of Surveillance Technology Oversight Project, a nonprofit advocacy organization hosted by the Urban Justice Center, say that the costs of these surveillance tools are often buried within city budgets.

In 2020, the City Council, working with civil liberties groups like S.T.O.P. — the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project — passed the POST Act, which requires more transparency around surveillance expenditures.

Ten years’ worth of contracts amounting to nearly $3 billion in NYPD surveillance contracts were uncovered under the act. The contracts were $2.5 billion more than previously reported, and included more than $400 million spent on the Domain Awareness System, an opaque surveillance system that collects tens of thousands of camera feeds from around the city.

Cahn says despite the passage of the POST Act, getting the NYPD to disclose its records on the technology remains an uphill battle.

The group is currently in litigation with the NYPD under New York’s Freedom of Information Law to compel the department to produce documents requested about their use of facial recognition surveillance in Times Square. They’re expected to be back in court next month, according to Cahn.

Police officials did not respond to request for comment.

Political action

Last month, New York Attorney General Letitia James sent a letter to the corporation that owns Madison Square Garden asking it to explain how it uses facial recognition technology to prohibit ticket holders from entering its venues.

In the letter, James called on MSG Entertainment to report the steps the company is taking to comply with the state’s civil and human rights laws, and ensure that its technology will not lead to discrimination.

“Our policy does not unlawfully prohibit anyone from entering our venues, and it is not our intent to dissuade attorneys from representing plaintiffs in litigation against us,” an MSG Entertainment spokesperson wrote in a statement. “We are merely excluding a small percentage of lawyers, and only during active litigation.”

Currently, there are no federal or state laws regulating the technology’s use. But lawmakers like Hoylman-Sigal are trying to change that.

Along with his bill that would effectively put a pause on the use of facial recognition technology, the state senator is sponsoring a bill that would bar landlords from using facial recognition systems on residential premises. Both of the bills remain in committee.

On the city level, Councilmember Carlina Rivera, whose Manhattan district includes the East Village, Gramercy Park and the Lower East Side, has introduced a bill that would require city agencies to submit annual reports about surveillance technology data, including but not limited to the collection, use, purchase and sale of the data. Under the current iteration of the bill, the NYPD would be excluded from this requirement.

Another bill sponsored by Rivera would define how the technology is used in residential spaces. Councilmember Jennifer Gutiérrez, whose district includes Williamsburg, Bushwick and Ridgewood, has also introduced a bill that would require building owners to submit registration when they're using biometric recognition.

There’s also a bill sponsored by Williams that would prohibit unauthorized surveillance on GPS systems without a person’s consent.

“We’re hoping that with this legislation, and a hearing at the City Council level, we can have the NYPD there in public speaking on the record as to what they're doing with the data, how they intend to use it and expand it,” Rivera said. “We want to get those answers to the public immediately.”. Like so many cities before it, Phoenix went all out to host the Super Bowl earlier this month. Expecting about 1 million fans to come to town for the biggest American sporting event of the year, the city rolled out a fleet of self-driving electric vehicles to ferry visitors from the airport. Robots sifted through the trash to pull out anything that could be composted. A 9,500-square-foot mural commemorating the event now graces a theater downtown, the largest official mural in Super Bowl history.

There were less visible developments, too. In preparation for the game, the local authorities upgraded a network of cameras around the city’s downtown—and have kept them running after the spectators have left. A spokesperson for the Phoenix Police Department would not confirm the exact type of the cameras installed, but ABC15 footage shows that they are a model manufactured by Axis Communications with enough zooming capability to produce a close-up portrait of any passerby from an extended distance, even when it’s completely dark out. The Phoenix police have said that the surveillance upgrades don’t involve facial-recognition technology, but Axis’s website specifies that the cameras are embedded with an “AI-based object detection and classification” system. Among other tricks, the cameras can tell if someone is loitering in an area for too long.

Advanced surveillance tactics are in use at other events venues. Late last year, Madison Square Garden in New York City found itself in the news for denying people access to games by means of a secretive facial-recognition system. One 28-year-old lawyer was reportedly approached by a stadium official who identified him by name and denied him entry simply because he is an employee of a law firm that represents clients who are suing the venue. But sports matches have long played host to surveillance measures that are, at times, implausibly intrusive or use certain technology that has not yet made its way into the mainstream of everyday life.

Sporting events, like any major gathering, have no choice but to monitor fans in the name of safety. A big stadium can fit 100,000 people, and global events such as the World Cup and the Olympic Games draw far more visitors—they are clear targets. Such spaces “should be of high importance from a security point of view,” says Daniel Eborall, a global director at the AI security start-up Irex who previously managed security at Texas A&M’s 100,000-plus-person Kyle Field. With such big crowds, violent outbreaks and acts of terror could have nightmarish consequences. In 2015, an attacker with a suicide belt was stopped by security officials before he could get inside Paris’s Stade de France, where close to 80,000 people were watching a soccer game.

And yet sports also have a way of bringing out particularly Orwellian tendencies in their organizers. For billionaire team owners, cities that have bet the house on stadiums, and less-than-democratic host governments, anything that poses a threat to business or reputation, even protesting or panhandling, can count as a matter of security. In some instances, organizers stretch surveillance far beyond the bounds of public safety to serve their own interests. During the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, for example, two women were detained for wearing orange clothes. Authorities suspected that they were engaged in a guerilla marketing campaign to promote a Dutch beer brand that was not an official FIFA sponsor.

Many organizers have broad power to act on these impulses, especially when an event is on private property. A big enough sports event on public property, meanwhile, can trigger special government authorizations. In France, the government plans to change national law so that it can use cameras that detect suspicious behavior at the 2024 Paris Olympics. The amount of money available for such gear is near-unlimited, especially in the post-9/11 era, because security budgets have mushroomed in the name of preventing mass terror. Authorities earmarked about $180 million for the 2000 Sydney Olympics. It is now routine for Olympic host cities to spend 10 times that amont.

With these high stakes, the traditional instruments of venue security—metal detectors, guards, sniffer dogs—are sometimes supplemented with technologies that have yet to be used elsewhere. Back in 2008, for example, when uncrewed surveillance aircraft were still almost exclusively the domain of militaries, Swiss police considered using air-force drones to circle over the European Football Championship. Facial recognition to identify criminals was tested even earlier, at Super Bowl XXXV in 2001, a time when the technology was barely known to exist outside of movies. And while spy balloons are now in the news, the Rio de Janeiro police launched a small fleet of them during the 2016 Olympics.

Such early and exuberant displays of surveillant prowess can have a contagion effect. When one club or government enacts “extraordinary security measures,” Jay Stanley, a senior policy analyst at the ACLU, told me, “you’ll have security people at other venues saying, ‘Well, we’re very serious too. We need this.’” Now artificial intelligence is ushering in the next sports-surveillance arms race. ​​According to a 2021 study by the National Center for Spectator Sports Safety and Security, sports-venue security directors were most likely to cite facial recognition as the technology they would acquire to beef up their venue security if funding allowed. Stadiums are particularly good for honing facial-recognition systems, researchers have noted, because groups of spectators are all facing in the same direction. “If the technology works in the sample-size test environment” of a stadium, Eborall told me, “then it can also be rolled out within the city environment and further public spaces.”

In some cases, this sort of intrusive technology does seem to improve the experience of being a fan. A survey of fans who entered the New York Mets’ Citi Field Stadium by way of a new facial-recognition access system reported that 80 percent of respondents found it to be a “more convenient and engaging way” to get into the stands. Security is one of the main factors pushing sports venues towards surveillance measures such as AI and facial recognition, Francisco Klauser, an expert on urban surveillance at the University of Neuchâtel, in Switzerland, told me, “but commercialization is also another one.” For example, the Minnesota Vikings have been testing a giant wide-area camera to detect demographic information about fans such as gender and age, while also estimating whether they’re paying attention to the game and the advertising.

Sports are a harbinger of a future of surveillance that is more intrusive, multitudinous, and expansive. But they aren’t just showing us the future. Sometimes, they’re directly bringing it about. In the lead-up to the 2010 World Cup, South Africa’s police minister openly proclaimed that its investments in surveillance technology were “not only meant for the event but will continue to assist the police in their crime-fighting initiatives long after the Soccer World Cup is over.” An AI-based camera on a street corner that might one day help identify a violent fan could eventually out a protester exercising a fundamental right.

This bond between sports and surveillance seems unlikely to break. Following the uproar over Madison Square Garden’s facial-recognition policies, the state supreme court in Manhattan granted an injunction that forbids the venue from turning away people with tickets from concerts and shows (although it can refuse to sell tickets, or revoke them). But the ruling makes an explicit exception: If it’s game night, the Garden can kick out whomever it wants.. She was denied entry to a Rockettes show — then the facial recognition debate ignited

Enlarge this image toggle caption Jesse Zhang for NPR Jesse Zhang for NPR

One evening in late November, New Jersey attorney Kelly Conlon was chaperoning her daughter's Girl Scout troop to see a Rockettes show at Radio City Music Hall.

Soon after arriving at the historic New York City venue, she was pulled aside by security and asked to confirm her identity. They told her their facial recognition system already knew who she was, and more importantly, where she worked, Conlon told The New York Times.

She was denied entry.

The issue was her law firm was involved in litigation against Radio City Music Hall's parent company, Madison Square Garden Entertainment (MSGE). As a result, Conlon — as well as lawyers at other firms pursuing litigation against MSGE — had been placed on an "exclusion list" at a string of popular venues owned by the group.

The story has become a flashpoint in the debate around facial recognition technology. While proponents say it has the ability to keep people safer, critics counter that there is little to support this idea, and warn that unchecked use of the technology could have untold consequences.

"Experts believe that facial recognition is so uniquely dangerous, and is something more akin to nuclear or biological weapons, where it's so profoundly harmful, it has such an enormous potential for harm to our basic human rights, [and] to people's safety," says Evan Greer, the director of Fight for the Future, a digital rights organization.

How does facial recognition software work?

Facial recognition is a form of biometric surveillance that works basically by comparing two images to each other, says Greer.

"You have a database of targets, and then you can use an algorithm to sift through footage or still images," they said. "Or in [Conlon's] case, they were doing real-time facial recognition, where effectively the surveillance cameras in the venue were constantly being analyzed by software looking for specific people."

Enlarge this image toggle caption Bloomberg via Getty Images Bloomberg via Getty Images

It doesn't take much to add a new person into the system, Greer said. Taking a headshot from a company website, a mugshot from an arrest database, or even a screenshot from a social media profile can be enough for the algorithm to target and then attempt to identify a person.

When asked about Conlon's case, MSGE said its policy was to not allow attorneys from firms pursuing active litigation, regardless of whether the individual lawyer was involved in the case.

"While we understand this policy is disappointing to some, we cannot ignore the fact that litigation creates an inherently adversarial environment," MSGE said in a statement. "All impacted attorneys were notified of the policy. We continue to make clear that impacted attorneys will be welcomed back to our venues upon resolution of the litigation."

Currently, facial recognition technology is legal in New York City. There is no federal law that specifically deals with facial recognition, leaving some places like San Francisco, Boston, Portland and the state of Illinois to pass varying types of regulation or bans on the tech in the last few years.

This slow crawl of patchwork regulation at a state level worries privacy experts.

For one, it's the simplicity of adding targets to a database that makes this technology so potentially dangerous for user privacy, says Albert Fox Cahn, the executive director of the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project (STOP) based in New York. Then there's the fact that biometric data is unique to your features — and permanent.

"You can change your name, you can change your social security number, you can change almost anything, but you can't change your face," Cahn said. "So if your biometric data is compromised once, it's compromised for life."

There are also concerns about who could potentially suffer most from the technology. While there are signs at MSGE venues stating facial recognition is being used for security purposes, critics say that there hasn't been much evidence of the tech upholding that purpose.

If anything, flaws inherent in the software exacerbate existing discrimination towards minority groups, putting them at a higher risk of being falsely accused of crimes, says Hannah Bloch-Wehba, an associate law professor at Texas A&M who specializes in privacy, technology, and democratic governance.

"Facial recognition technology tends to misidentify people of color, and in particular, women of color," she said. "And so I could see a serious concern about the sort of racial and gender bias implications of this kind of tech being used to screen people."

Some versions of the tech have shown to be less adept at differentiating between people with darker complexions in the past. And Greer says that traditional law enforcement surveillance has also historically led to the over-policing of communities of color. They fear combining the two could lead to an amplified effect.

"Because of the legacy of racism within policing in the United States, arrest databases are disproportionately filled with the faces of Black and Brown people, and particularly Black men," she said. "If you get stopped, and they scan your face with facial recognition, you're simply more likely to get a match if you're a Black man than if you're a white man because of that kind of racist legacy that's now being exacerbated using this technology."

Over the past few years, a number of Black men have been falsely identified as suspects in criminal investigations that used facial recognition software, in some cases resulting in wrongful arrests and charges.

In Detroit, a Black teenager was kicked out of a roller rink in 2021 after facial recognition technology mistakenly identified her as someone who had previously gotten into a fight at the property.

"We may hear these high profile stories about attorneys," says Greer, "But in the end, we know that this technology is disproportionately used on marginalized communities, and disproportionately harms marginalized communities."

A question of safety

In a statement to NPR, MSGE said facial recognition technology was widely used throughout the country, including in the sports and entertainment industry, and in shops, casinos and airports "to protect the safety of the people that visit and work at those locations."

"Our venues are worldwide destinations and several sit on major transit hubs in the heart of New York," it said. "We have always made it clear to our guests and to the public that we use facial recognition as one of our tools to provide a safe and secure environment for our customers and ourselves."

To critics like Bloch-Wehba, the idea of safety requires more nuance.

"We have to ask, who are you trying to keep [patrons] safe from?" she said. "How are you deciding who poses the threat? Is that a decision that the management of the venue is making, or is it a decision that the technological product is making? And who is checking that decision?"

Fox Cahn says that a lack of regulation for facial recognition technology in New York City leaves him unsurprised by the recent headlines that garnered so much attention.

"New York has given businesses free rein to use facial recognition in their properties. And it was only a matter of time before we saw owners using it to retaliate this way," he said.

STOP, and other advocacy groups like Amnesty International and the Immigrant Defense Project, are working towards legislation that will curb the use of this software in public places in New York, and hope for a federal ban down the line as well.

The process hasn't been quick, which Fox Cahn said added to the challenge of keeping up with the ever-evolving technology.

He said many New York City lawmakers were eager for regulation, but that he believed some people at the city council were blocking progress. He attributed the lack of support to concerns some politicians may have about clashing with the New York Police Department and the companies that supply the city with this kind of technology.

Enlarge this image toggle caption Steffi Loos/Getty Images Steffi Loos/Getty Images

Tiffany Cabán, a city council member representing New York City's 22nd district, sees a clear connection between political will and maintaining the status quo.

"Part of it is the age-old tale of money in politics," she said. "If you are pumping money into the system and people see themselves as accountable, or [see that] your contributions are responsible for them holding their office, or being in a position of power, then it's not going to be in their best interests to push forward legislation that inhibits those folks' ability to do the things that they want to do."

A former public defender, Cabán recalls faulty technology being used as evidence in criminal cases, and she would like to see it banned.

"There have been efforts to introduce and pass legislation that increases police accountability. And I think that legislation surrounding facial recognition would be part and parcel to that," she said. "So I am hopeful at least that we will see some of those things coming out and in this next year that we've just started."

The call for law and order is strong

The divide among New York politicians starts at the top, with Mayor Eric Adams advocating the technology in a recent POLITICO interview.

Adams, a former NYPD captain, campaigned on a platform of public safety, and sees facial recognition technology as one tool in his arsenal.

"It blows my mind how much we have not embraced technology, and part of that is because many of our electeds are afraid," Adams said. "Anything technology they think, 'Oh, it's a boogeyman. It's Big Brother watching you.' Big Brother is protecting you."

The NYPD is also no stranger to the technology. An FAQ on its website states it has been using facial recognition since 2011 to identify suspects in various types of crimes.

"[The NYPD] knows of no case in New York City in which a person was falsely arrested on the basis of a facial recognition match," the FAQ reads.

"Safeguards built into the NYPD's protocols for managing facial recognition, which provide an immediate human review of the software findings, prevent misidentification."

Jake Parker is the senior director of government relations for the Security Industry Association, a trade association for security companies, and advocates the use of facial recognition technology.

Enlarge this image toggle caption Andy Kropa/Getty Images Andy Kropa/Getty Images

Amid the criticism of MSGE's use of the tech in the Conlon case, Parker said its enforcement demonstrated some of the potential security benefits, too.

"It makes me think about how many times someone subject to a restraining order showed up without warning at a workplace and committed violence despite the restriction. And unfortunately, this happens all the time, and women are often the victims," Parker said.

He believes the tech can help secure public spaces like schools, airports, music venues, and other places that may require identity verification — as well as make them more efficient.

"With almost any application of facial recognition, it is augmenting and helping a human control process become faster, more accurate," he said.

"The position of the technology leaders in this space, we believe any technology, including facial recognition, should only be used for purposes that are lawful, ethical and non-discriminatory."

Both Parker and the NYPD refute the claims that people of color are more likely to suffer from this software.

The NYPD says people identified by the technology are routinely reviewed, meaning "erroneous software matches can be swiftly corrected by human observers."

Parker, meanwhile, cites studies from the federal government's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

"You look at the most recent data from the federal government's evaluation program, which most of the leading providers participated in, the top 150 technologies are more than 99% accurate overall, and even across Black, white, male and female demographics," Parker said.

A spokesperson for the NIST's facial recognition team said this interpretation of their data appeared to be correct, but they noted the studies were done in lab settings, with dedicated lighting and cooperative participants.

"Without this cooperation we'd expect, as shown in our testing, the 99% value to decline," they said in a statement. "NIST testing on cooperative subjects has shown improvement in demographic difference performance. Issues with image capture, such as lighting, can still exist and impact performance."

The possibility of widespread regulation for facial recognition technology is a top priority for activist groups, not only because it could curb scenarios like the one at Radio City Music Hall, but because who it applies to could be hugely impactful.

Bloch-Wehba says that there is already more existing regulation around facial recognition technology for government and law enforcement use in the U.S. than there is for private businesses.

"If we just were to regulate police use of facial recognition, but any private agency or business can use it however it sees fit, then that creates a dynamic where we've allowed the private sector to, in some ways, become more powerful than the government itself," Bloch-Wehba said.

This past week, New York lawmakers rallied outside Madison Square Garden in protest of MSGE's policy, saying another person had been ejected at a venue.

Meanwhile, a number of law firms are now suing MSGE over the policy, with the cases working their way through the courts. The outcomes are being closely watched.

"The decisions that we make about technology and the policies that govern it are going to shape not just the next 10 years, but the entire future of human civilization," says Greer. "The stakes really are that high."