ARTICLE TITLE: Southwest Airlines Crew Scheduling Solver Degenerates Flight Network
What’s the problem with Southwest Airlines scheduling system?
The company knows where the issues lie but doesn’t yet have a plan to fix them.
Southwest Airlines’ holiday meltdown started with weather woes but ended up being a story about the company’s infrastructure. Here’s what we know about the airline’s technology woes:

1. Southwest has a history of sticking with old systems.
The airline still doesn’t assign seating, and it used plastic boarding position markers until 2002, when post-9/11 airport security changes forced it to change.
The company also said at a media day in November that its “turn time,” or the amount of time it took to land a plane and get it back in the air again, had become bogged down by regulatory documentation requirements. Baggage reports, weather reports and other reports were all being delivered to pilots and managers on paper for all 4,000 flights a day.

It said at its media day that it recently began delivering reports electronically, something most offices and airlines adopted years ago.
In 2020, the Federal Aviation Administration said Southwest should be fined $3.92 million for counting luggage on the tarmac and using average weight estimates to balance a plane’s cargo hold.

“It almost became a running joke around the company that we aren’t able to make certain changes because it would involve technology,” said Lyn Montgomery, president of the union representing the 16,000 flight attendants at Southwest, TWU Local 556.
2. The crew scheduling system is the main culprit.
Southwest uses internally built and maintained systems called SkySolver and Crew Web Access for pilots and flight attendants. They can sign on to those systems to pick flights and then make changes when flights are canceled or delayed or when there is an illness.

“Southwest has generated systems internally themselves instead of using more standard programs that others have used,” Montgomery said. “Some systems even look historic like they were designed on Windows 95.”
SkySolver and Crew Web Access are both available as mobile apps, but those systems often break down during even mild weather events, and employees end up making phone calls to Southwest’s crew scheduling help desk to find better routes. During periods of heavy operational trouble, the system gets bogged down with too much demand.

Since Dec. 21, Southwest has canceled more than 15,800 flights, according to Flightaware.com.

As the problems over Christmas weekend unfolded, crew members said the scheduling software didn’t reflect that they had been dropped from canceled flights. That put many of them over their hour limits on paper, which prevented them from picking up new flights.

3. When the software faltered, the company tried to fix the problems by telephone.
Montgomery and Casey Murray, who heads the Southwest Airlines Pilots Association union, said more than 1,000 pilots were left out of position on Christmas Day. When the scheduling system bogged down, the company resorted to phone calls. It trained about 1,000 employees to help reschedule crew members manually, calling them individually.

Murray and Montgomery both say the company needs more automated options and methods other than phone calls to make schedule changes.

4. Fixing the system won’t be cheap — or fast.
In its annual report last year, Southwest said it was “increasingly dependent on technology,” including systems that handled crew scheduling. But integrating new systems and technology requires a balancing act between the existing ones and new ones, it said.


“Modifications and refinements to [Southwest’s] systems have been and are expected to continue to be expensive to implement and can divert management’s attention from other matters,” the company wrote.

On Thursday, when the company announced that it would attempt to return to its regular schedule on Friday, Southwest CEO Bob Jordan emphasized that a fix would take time.

“It’s just a large and complicated project,” Jordan said. “That’s not meant to be an excuse; it’s just a fact.”