Coupang's headquarters in Seoul (Coupang) Coupang's headquarters in Seoul (Coupang)

South Korea’s antitrust watchdog has launched a probe into e-commerce giant Coupang over the accusation that the company has meddled with algorithms to prioritize its own products, according to multiple reports on Sunday.



According to the reports, the Korea Fair Trade Commission conducted an on-the-spot inspection at Coupang’s headquarters office in Seoul late last month following accusations that it had violated the Fair Trade Act.



One of the accusations claims that Coupang had meddled with search algorithms on its platform to make its private label products appear at the top of the page while other companies’ products were pushed to the bottom and received less exposure.



The company has also been accused of demanding that suppliers offer the cheapest prices possible and threatening with disadvantages if they fail to follow through.



The anti-trust watchdog is also looking into whether Coupang had coerced suppliers into purchasing advertisements and excluded them from its subscription-based delivery service as an act of retaliation, the reports said.



In a similar case, Naver was fined 26.7 billion won ($23 million) last year for manipulating search algorithms on its video and shopping platforms to place its own content and products on the top of search results.



Following the decision, Song Sang-min, director general at the KFTC, said the web portal giant “deceived consumers and distorted competition” by tweaking search results, though Naver denied the accusation and said the move was to diversify content.



The move comes as the company has faced mounting criticism over its treatment of delivery workers in recent months.



Last month, a group of people staged a protest outside the company’s headquarters over the death of the owner of a restaurant listed on its food delivery app, Coupang Eats.



The owner suffered a stroke and later died after dealing with a Coupang Eats customer, prompting criticisms that the company had fallen short on protecting restaurant owners.



A fire also broke out at one of its distribution centers last month, lasting days and leaving one firefighter dead. While the investigation into the cause is still ongoing, reports of faulty sprinklers and fire shutters added to the criticism.. Try unlimited access Only $1 for 4 weeks

Then $75 per month.

Complete digital access to quality FT journalism on any device. Cancel anytime during your trial.. Coupang was reportedly investigated by South Korea’s Fair Trade Commission due to allegations that the e-commerce company tampered with algorithms so it can prioritize its own products. This was reported by insiders this weekend.

According to The Korea Herald, the FTC conducted an unannounced inspection at Coupang’s headquarters located in Seoul. Based on the report, the allegation it violated the country’s Fair Trade Act prompted the commission to carry out the look-over last month.

The allegation against the e-commerce giant

It was claimed that Coupang altered its platform’s search algorithms to ensure that its own products appear on the top searches and top of the page. As a result, the items from other companies were bumped down to the bottom, so they had less exposure.

In addition, Coupang was also accused of demanding the suppliers to only give the lowest prices. If they do not follow this, they are reportedly threatened with disadvantages. And this is not all, as the FTC is also checking if Coupang pressured its suppliers into buying ads and cut them out of its subscription-based delivery service as a form of retaliation.

It was noted that Naver also had a similar case, and it was fined ₩26.7 billion or around $23 million for manipulating its search algorithms on its e-commerce platforms. The purpose is the same as what Coupang was accused of, which is to place its own products on the top search results.

Coupang to start a business in Singapore

Meanwhile, amid this investigation, it was also reported that Coupang is now starting its business in Singapore. In fact, the company already hired the needed senior executives for its operations in Southeast Asia.

"Coupang completed the hiring of senior roles such as heads of retail, logistics and operations in Singapore,” The Korea Times quoted a company official as saying. “It also hired below C-suite executives in roles such as logistics, marketing and IT."

It was shared that the job openings for the position were posted on Coupang Rocket Your Career website, and apparently, the response was good. Thus, the senior executives are now complete at this point.

Finally, Coupang chose Singapore as the base for expansion in Southeast Asia as it has a robust market, and it would be easier to reach and expand to other Asian countries from here. The company’s goal is to replicate Amazon’s success even with the competitors in Asia, such as Lazada and Shopee.. Cho Hong-sun, a senior Korea Fair Trade Commission (KFTC) official, speaks during a press briefing on a punitive measure taken against e-commerce giant Coupang at the Government Complex Sejong, Thursday. Yonhap



E-commerce giant plans to file administrative suit against punitive measure



By Yi Whan-woo



Coupang has been fined 3.29 billion won ($2.81 million) by the country's top antitrust regulator, Thursday, for its alleged involvement in unfair business practices and interfering in the business of vendors.



The Korea Fair Trade Commission (KFTC) said the e-commerce giant was found to have forced hundreds of sellers from early 2017 to September 2020 to comply with its unlawful sales and marketing policies to maintain its competitive edge over other online retailers amid the fierce battle for market dominance.



Those affected by such policies include LG Household & Health Care, Yuhan Kimberly, Maeil Dairies, Namyang Dairy Products and Cuchen.



The KFTC carried out its probe into Coupang after LG Household & Health Care, an LG Group affiliate, filed a complaint in 2019.



According to the antitrust watchdog, Coupang had urged its suppliers to raise sales prices of its goods sold in rival online malls to ensure that it could offer those products at the cheapest prices.



It additionally coerced suppliers to purchase ads and put the burden of expenses for promotional events on them. For instance, a total of 388 suppliers had to pay 5.7 billion won combined after Coupang offered discount coupons on daily necessities and baby products.



"The case is noteworthy as it illustrates that an online retailer is now in a predominant position over large companies as well as manufacturers of popular goods," Cho Hong-sun, a senior KFTC official, said during a briefing at Government Complex Sejong.



It noted such a case has only been witnessed in the past among department stores and supermarket chains that are mostly owned by conglomerates.



It also noted about 70 percent of domestic shoppers buy goods online and that its punitive measure against Coupang is "meaningful in uncovering and curbing new forms of unlawful trade."



Coupang, which denied its predominant position over the large firms during the KFTC investigation, expressed regret over the regulator's decision, saying that it will lodge an administrative suit in response.





A gigantic banner bearing the name of Korean e-commerce giant Coupang is displayed on the building of the New York Stock Exchange on March 11, to mark its debut on the U.S. stock market. Korea Times file