Amazon allegedly used its search system and user data to gain an edge over sellers in India, according to a new report from Reuters. The report — based on internal emails, strategy plans, and other documents — outlines an ambitious plan to dominate the platform with its in-house brands. According to the documents, that plan included strategies that Amazon has vehemently denied using amid antitrust scrutiny.

The Reuters story provides extensive details about Amazon India’s alleged activity, but two key pieces stand out. The first is a claim that Amazon employees used “search seeding” (or boosting the rankings of specific product listings) to ensure that company brands like AmazonBasics appeared “in the first two or three” search results for a category. The second, more extensive allegation involves Amazon identifying “reference” or “benchmark” products that are popular with customers and then copying them. At least two high-level executives allegedly reviewed the plans.

The claims mirror earlier accusations against Amazon

Amazon’s copying process apparently went beyond simply cloning the look of well-known products. The documents reportedly indicate Amazon India employees examined internal data like how often customers returned purchases and then designed products based around it. Reuters quotes one 2016 report about an in-house brand called Solimo, whose strategy was to “use information from Amazon.in to develop products and then leverage the Amazon.in platform to market these products to our customers.” The report also described plans to partner with the original manufacturers of reference products to capture “unique processes which impact the end quality of the product.”

Amazon denied the allegations in a statement to Reuters, calling them “factually incorrect and unsubstantiated.” But they mirror claims from other countries. A 2020 Wall Street Journal report found that Amazon employees had studied detailed internal sales data to help it crush independent sellers with competing products.

Amazon told the Journal that the tactic was strictly prohibited among employees and denied the claims in a US congressional hearing, although then-CEO Jeff Bezos said he couldn’t “guarantee” that the policy had never been violated. Throughout questioning, however, Bezos portrayed possible violations as the actions of rogue employees — not the kind of formal strategy that Reuters describes.. Amazon allegedly "ran a systematic campaign" of copying other companies' products in India and gamed search results to promote its own versions. Reuters obtained thousands of pages of internal documents including emails and business plans that detail the practices.

A private brands team in India (which works on the company's own products ) used data from Amazon's marketplace in the country to find and target goods and create knockoff versions, the agency reported. The goal was to find “reference” or “benchmark” wares and copy them. A document from 2016 detailed a plan for an Amazon brand called Solimo, which is tailored toward the Indian market. The aim was to “use information from Amazon.in to develop products and then leverage the Amazon.in platform to market these products to our customers.”

The document indicated that the private brands group aimed to form partnerships with the manufacturers of the benchmark items, because those companies use “unique processes which impact the end quality of the product.” The team sought to gain insights from the manufacturers and use the so-called "Tribal Knowledge" in its own versions to "fully match quality with our reference product."

After it made the knockoffs, the company manipulated search results with a method called “search seeding” so that AmazonBasics and Solimo items would pop up near the top of the page, according to the document. The company also "aggressively" used a technique called “search sparkles on PC, Mobile and App to specifically promote Solimo products on relevant customer searches from ‘All Product Search’ and Category search,” per the document. Sparkles are the banners placed above search results.

"As Reuters hasn't shared the documents or their provenance with us, we are unable to confirm the veracity or otherwise of the information and claims as stated," an Amazon spokesperson told Engadget in a statement. "We believe these claims are factually incorrect and unsubstantiated."

"Amazon identifies selection gaps based on customer preferences at an aggregate level only and shares this information with all sellers," the spokesperson added. "Amazon’s policy strictly prohibits the use or sharing of non-public, seller-specific data for the benefit of any seller, including sellers of private brands. This policy applies uniformly across our company to all employees — our internal teams receive regular trainings on its application and we thoroughly investigate any reports of employees acting contrary to this policy."

This is far from the first time we've heard reports of Amazon allegedly copying other companies' products. Over the years, the company has been accused of cloning the Instant Pot, Allbirds sneakers and a camera bag from Peak Design to name a few. A 2020 Wall Street Journal investigation also indicated that Amazon studied sales data of third-party products on its platform to inform the design and pricing of its own goods.. By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app

Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview

Internal Amazon documents show leadership at the company's India marketplace developed strategies to copy competitors and sell their own products at a lower cost, according to a Wednesday report from Reuters.

The outlet viewed thousands of pages of internal emails, strategy papers, and business plans that revealed how Amazon worked to siphon data from third-party sellers in India to create its own knock-offs and profit in the country, which is one of Amazon's largest potential growth markets.

This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now.

Amazon has long fielded backlash over what critics say is undercutting the competition on its online marketplace and has faced lawsuits and antitrust scrutiny over the matter. The company has consistently pushed back on that characterization, including during a July 2020 Congressional testimony by then-CEO Jeff Bezos where he said Amazon does not favor its own retail products over those of third parties.

Private label marketing has a long history in retail, and many brands including Target, Costco, and Walmart, rely on in-house products for a sizeable portion of their revenues. Still, the documents show the extent to which Amazon has been able to leverage its power as the world's largest e-commerce platform.

Advertisement

The internal material reviewed by Reuters shows Amazon not only used third-party data to beef up its private brand business but also rigged the company's search results so that its private brand items would appear "in the first 2 or three … search results," according to a 2016 strategy report for India.

Related stories

Leadership was in on the plan as well — Reuters reported that one current Amazon executive, Russell Grandinetti, personally reviewed the strategy.

Amazon did not immediately respond to Insider's request for comment on this story but told Reuters it "strictly prohibits the use or sharing of non-public, seller-specific data for the benefit of any seller, including sellers of private brands" and doesn't display search results based on whether those products are private or third-party. The company also called the claims in the report "unsubstantiated" and "factually incorrect."

In one instance, Amazon specifically zeroed in on a popular Indian shirt company, owned by India's "retail king." The e-commerce giant opted to "follow the measurements" of the shirts, like the neck, armhole, and sleeve dimensions, and sell their own copycats, the documents said according to Reuters.

Advertisement

The same 2016 document reportedly showed that Amazon wanted to partner with the manufacturers that worked with its third-party rivals in India to "fully match quality with our reference product." The company referred to that as "Tribal Knowledge."

One current seller told Reuters that Amazon's strategy "destroys the level playing field." Another, who told the publication that he used to earn $1,500 a month selling Logitech mouse pads on Amazon's India marketplace, said his sales dipped off after customers started buying an AmazonBasics one that was about 60% cheaper. He said his Logitech product also started dropping in the search results.

"It's very frustrating, he told Reuters. "They are mistreating sellers."

The report appears to support arguments from Lina Khan, the new US Federal Trade Commission Chair, who has long described Amazon's private-label business as anti-competitive.

Advertisement

"It is third-party sellers who bear the initial costs and uncertainties when introducing new products; by merely spotting them, Amazon gets to sell products only once their success has been tested," she wrote in 2017. "The anti-competitive implications here seem clear."