The high-profile case of a Black man wrongly arrested earlier this year wasn’t the first misidentification linked to controversial facial recognition technology used by Detroit Police, the Free Press has learned.

Last year, a 25-year-old Detroit man was wrongly accused of a felony for supposedly reaching into a teacher’s vehicle, grabbing a cellphone and throwing it, cracking the screen and breaking the case.

Detroit Police used facial recognition technology in that investigation, too.

It identified Michael Oliver as an investigative lead. After that hit, the teacher who had his phone snatched from his hands identified Oliver in a photo lineup as the person responsible.

Oliver was charged with a felony count of larceny in the May 2019 incident on West Warren Avenue in Detroit.

He told his attorney he didn’t do it. Evidence in the case supported him.

Controversy over law enforcement using facial recognition technology is not new, nor is it confined to the city of Detroit. But recent uprisings around the country in response to racial injustice in the wake of the death of George Floyd have again brought criticism of the technology to the forefront.

In Detroit, where police started using facial recognition software as an investigative tool in 2017, protesters have demanded the city stop using it, saying the error rate is high when used to identify people of color. City Council, which will consider extending a software contract to help pay for it, has been urged to vote no by some residents. Detroit's civilian Board of Police Commissioners also has been discussing the department's use of technology.

In the cellphone case, according to transcribed testimony, the teacher called 911 as he watched a group of students fighting. One student had a baseball bat and others were wrestling on the ground. The teacher used his cellphone to video record the incident. The phone was recording when a young man reached into the teacher's car and snatched the phone.

Oliver said the first thing that crossed his mind when his lawyer showed him the footage: “It wasn’t me.”

Oliver has tattoos up and down his arms. Those markings weren’t visible on the person captured on video. Oliver’s attorney, Patrick Nyenhuis, also noticed differences in the hair style and body type between the person in the video and his client, he said.

“It was obvious they had the wrong person.” Nyenhuis told the Free Press.

He took his concerns and pictures of his client to Wayne County Assistant Prosecutor Brian Surma, a supervisor in the office. Surma and the teacher reviewed photographs, determined Oliver was misidentified and both agreed the case should be dismissed immediately, a court transcript shows.

“We are convinced that there was a misidentification here,” Surma told a judge in September.

The case was tossed.

“I’m glad it’s all over,” Oliver told the Free Press this week.

More:He was arrested because of a computer error. Now he wants to fix the system. | Opinion

More:Black lawmakers call for ban on police use of facial recognition technology

Oliver, now 26, said he was nervous as his case proceeded last year because people still get convicted for crimes they don’t commit. He questioned how his face ever got connected to the case.

During the investigation, police captured an image from the cellphone video, sent it for facial recognition and the photo came back to Oliver, the police report said.

After Oliver was singled out, a picture of his face was included in a photo lineup of possible suspects that was presented to the teacher.

A second person, a student, was also captured in the video with the suspect. The officer in charge of the case testified he didn’t interview that person though he'd been given that student’s name.

Police investigated Oliver's case prior to a new policy governing the use of facial recognition software. It includes stricter rules on when Detroit police can use it. The technology is now used only as a tool to help solve violent felonies, Detroit police have said.

A spokesman for the department said Wednesday that he was looking into questions from the Free Press about Oliver's case.

The Wayne County Prosecutor's Office also now has more stringent protocol in place for facial recognition cases.

Evidence in Oliver's case wasn't reviewed by a supervisor in the prosecutor's office prior to him being charged, spokeswoman Maria Miller said in an email. Current protocol requires a supervisor review all evidence in a facial recognition case prior to a charging decision. There also must be other evidence that corroborates the allegations in order to charge someone.

The prosecutor's office is taking additional steps, Miller said. It will be required that facial recognition cases be submitted to Prosecutor Kym Worthy — the highest-ranking person in the office — for approval if an assistant prosecuting attorney and supervisor determine charges should be authorized.

Miller said the prosecutor's office knows of no other cases in which people charged with crimes were misidentified, other than that of Oliver and Robert Williams.

Williams is a Farmington Hills man arrested in front of his family in January and accused of stealing high-end watches. Prosecutors and police have apologized for how that case was handled.

The case generated headlines across the country, including in the Free Press, the New York Times and the Washington Post. While in custody, Williams said he told police he wasn't the man seen in a blurry image from store surveillance video.

“As a result of these two cases, we have a more stringent protocol in facial recognition cases," Worthy said in an statement. "The cases will be reviewed during the warrant charging phase, prior to the preliminary examination, and again when the case is bound over to the Circuit Court in any case where facial recognition has been used as an investigative tool.”

She said she supports the use of the technology as an investigative tool only.

"In the summer of 2019, the Detroit Police Department asked me personally to adopt their Facial Recognition Policy," she said. "I declined and cited studies regarding the unreliability of the software, especially as it relates to people of color."

Dan Korobkin, ACLU of Michigan legal director, called the technology dangerous in a statement Friday. He urged police and prosecutors across the country to review cases involving the use of the technology and notify all people charged as a result of it.

Studies have shown the technology, relying on computer algorithms, sometimes has trouble distinguishing human faces, especially with people of color.

Oliver and Williams are both Black.

On Wednesday, Black Democrats in the Michigan House of Representatives called for a ban on the technology.

Detroit Police Chief James Craig, who is Black, has said he is a strong believer in facial recognition software. Last summer, he said police had used the technology about 500 times then moved on to the next phase of investigation only 30% of the time.

Craig has blamed poor investigative work for what happened to Williams.

The Detroit police commission discussed Williams' case during a meeting Thursday afternoon. Police gave a presentation and Craig said the situation should not have happened.

Williams also spoke and encouraged the technology to be banned, calling it racist.

Last month, board member Evette Griffie sought answers from police about Williams' case, including a timeline of events and any discipline resulting from the misidentification.

“One mistake is too many,” she said at the time.

Griffie told the Free Press she wanted to know more about what happened.

“Do we have the proper checks and balances to make sure that what’s supposed to happen is actually happening?” she said.

Staff writers Nancy Kaffer and Paul Egan and the Associated Press contributed to this report.

Contact Elisha Anderson: eanderson@freepress.com. Detroit police wrongfully arrested another Black man based on flawed facial recognition technology that often yields errors in identifying people of color, according to a new lawsuit Detroit police wrongfully arrested another Black man based on flawed facial recognition technology that often yields errors in identifying people of color, according to a new lawsuit obtained by Motherboard

Michael Oliver, 26, was arrested for a larceny he didn’t commit after the software led the Detroit Police Department (DPD) to him in July 2019, according to the suit, filed Friday in Wayne County Circuit Court. Oliver's attorneys provided Motherboard with court documents for the case, which was first reported by the Michael Oliver, 26, was arrested for a larceny he didn’t commit after the software led the Detroit Police Department (DPD) to him in July 2019, according to the suit, filed Friday in Wayne County Circuit Court. Oliver's attorneys provided Motherboard with court documents for the case, which was first reported by the Detroit Free Press and is the second of its kind in Detroit reported this year.

Advertisement

“[Police relied] on failed facial recognition technology knowing the science of facial recognition has a substantial error rate among black and brown persons of ethnicity which would lead to the wrongful arrest and incarceration of persons in that ethnic demographic,” the lawsuit states. The case comes after the same police department was exposed by the “[Police relied] on failed facial recognition technology knowing the science of facial recognition has a substantial error rate among black and brown persons of ethnicity which would lead to the wrongful arrest and incarceration of persons in that ethnic demographic,” the lawsuit states. The case comes after the same police department was exposed by the New York Times in June for wrongfully arresting 42-year-old Robert Williams after using the algorithmic system.

Oliver, whose story echoes Williams’ dramatic ordeal, is suing the city of Detroit and the white detective who allegedly botched the case for at least $12 million. He claims the algorithm along with “grossly negligent” police work led to his nearly three day imprisonment—and ultimately hijacked his life. Oliver, whose story echoes Williams’ dramatic ordeal, is suing the city of Detroit and the white detective who allegedly botched the case for at least $12 million. He claims the algorithm along with “grossly negligent” police work led to his nearly three day imprisonment—and ultimately hijacked his life.

“It was wrong,” Oliver told Motherboard. “I lost my job and my car; my whole life had to be put on hold… That technology shouldn’t be used by police.” “It was wrong,” Oliver told Motherboard. “I lost my job and my car; my whole life had to be put on hold… That technology shouldn’t be used by police.”

Oliver—who has an oval-shaped face and a tattoo above his left eyebrow—only vaguely resembles the actual suspect, who has no visible tattoos, a rounder face and darker skin, according to photo evidence. Oliver—who has an oval-shaped face and a tattoo above his left eyebrow—only vaguely resembles the actual suspect, who has no visible tattoos, a rounder face and darker skin, according to photo evidence.

“The detective blew it, frankly,” said Oliver’s lawyer, David Robinson. “He certainly was in possession of a photograph of the real crook but for some reason wasn’t able to distinguish the difference between them.” “The detective blew it, frankly,” said Oliver’s lawyer, David Robinson. “He certainly was in possession of a photograph of the real crook but for some reason wasn’t able to distinguish the difference between them.”

The case raises alarms about facial recognition technology—widely criticized as one of the most troubling forms of police surveillance—after police across the US used it to identify and arrest Black Lives Matter protesters earlier this summer. The New York Police Department, for example, used a facial recognition system to last month track down 28-year-old activist The case raises alarms about facial recognition technology—widely criticized as one of the most troubling forms of police surveillance—after police across the US used it to identify and arrest Black Lives Matter protesters earlier this summer. The New York Police Department, for example, used a facial recognition system to last month track down 28-year-old activist Derrick Ingram , who was accused of assault after allegedly shouting into a police officer’s ear with a bullhorn.

Advertisement

Oliver’s case of mistaken identity began on May 15, 2019 when a teacher driving by a group of brawling students used a cellphone to record the fight near a school in Detroit, according to Oliver’s arrest warrant. Oliver’s case of mistaken identity began on May 15, 2019 when a teacher driving by a group of brawling students used a cellphone to record the fight near a school in Detroit, according to Oliver’s arrest warrant.

A young black man involved in the scuffle spotted the teacher, Stephen Cassini, filming and reached into his car, grabbed his cellphone and cracked it, according to the warrant. Cassini captured a video of the incident on his phone before it was swiped and gave the footage to the DPD, according to the lawsuit. A young black man involved in the scuffle spotted the teacher, Stephen Cassini, filming and reached into his car, grabbed his cellphone and cracked it, according to the warrant. Cassini captured a video of the incident on his phone before it was swiped and gave the footage to the DPD, according to the lawsuit.

Even though the department had “no written policy” allowing cops to use facial recognition technology, detective Donald Bussa asked a lieutenant to run an image of the suspect through a database of photos in search of a match, according to the lawsuit. The algorithm sent back a shot of Oliver and “Bussa assumed [he] was the person who snatched Cassini’s phone,” it states. Even though the department had “no written policy” allowing cops to use facial recognition technology, detective Donald Bussa asked a lieutenant to run an image of the suspect through a database of photos in search of a match, according to the lawsuit. The algorithm sent back a shot of Oliver and “Bussa assumed [he] was the person who snatched Cassini’s phone,” it states.

After running the software, developed by the After running the software, developed by the firm DataWorks Plus , Bussa showed Cassini a photo lineup of suspects and the teacher allegedly identified Oliver. The detective then got a warrant for his arrest “with no further investigation,” the lawsuit states.

Oliver was driving to work on July 31, 2019 when he was pulled over, “handcuffed and carted off to jail,” according to the court documents. His car was impounded and he was forced to wait anxiously behind bars for 2 1/2 days—with little information about what he had supposedly done. Oliver was driving to work on July 31, 2019 when he was pulled over, “handcuffed and carted off to jail,” according to the court documents. His car was impounded and he was forced to wait anxiously behind bars for 2 1/2 days—with little information about what he had supposedly done.

Advertisement

“I was nervous because I know people go to jail for things that they didn’t do,” Oliver said. “There was no explaining to police that it wasn’t me. They weren’t trying to understand that.” “I was nervous because I know people go to jail for things that they didn’t do,” Oliver said. “There was no explaining to police that it wasn’t me. They weren’t trying to understand that.”

In jail, he slept on a cement floor and ate bologna sandwiches—the only option—for breakfast, lunch and dinner, he said. While behind bars, “Bussa never made any attempt to take a statement from [Oliver] or do anything to offer [him] the chance to prove his innocence,” according to the lawsuit. In jail, he slept on a cement floor and ate bologna sandwiches—the only option—for breakfast, lunch and dinner, he said. While behind bars, “Bussa never made any attempt to take a statement from [Oliver] or do anything to offer [him] the chance to prove his innocence,” according to the lawsuit.

But there were soon signs that police had busted the wrong guy. Unlike the actual thief, Oliver had faded sleeve tattoos on both of his arms. That amount of ink, along with images of his face, should have been a dead giveaway, said Oliver’s criminal defense lawyer, Patrick Nyenhuis. But there were soon signs that police had busted the wrong guy. Unlike the actual thief, Oliver had faded sleeve tattoos on both of his arms. That amount of ink, along with images of his face, should have been a dead giveaway, said Oliver’s criminal defense lawyer, Patrick Nyenhuis.

“He told me, ‘It wasn’t me.’ I looked at the pictures and said, “Yeah that’s obviously not you,” Nyenhuis told Motherboard. “He told me, ‘It wasn’t me.’ I looked at the pictures and said, “Yeah that’s obviously not you,” Nyenhuis told Motherboard.

Even so, during Oliver’s first court date in August 2019, law enforcement officials refused to back down.“The prosecutor wasn’t convinced. He said, ‘He could have gotten tattoos after the crime,’” Nyenhuis said. “I don’t know how they messed it up so badly.” Even so, during Oliver’s first court date in August 2019, law enforcement officials refused to back down.“The prosecutor wasn’t convinced. He said, ‘He could have gotten tattoos after the crime,’” Nyenhuis said. “I don’t know how they messed it up so badly.”

By mid-September, the Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office dropped the larceny charges, but Oliver says he’s still reeling. In the end, he suffered “embarrassment, indignation, outrage, shame, fear, anxiety, and loss of reputation” along with “economic loss,” according to the lawsuit. By mid-September, the Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office dropped the larceny charges, but Oliver says he’s still reeling. In the end, he suffered “embarrassment, indignation, outrage, shame, fear, anxiety, and loss of reputation” along with “economic loss,” according to the lawsuit.

Advertisement

Robinson now suspects the Detroit facial recognition technology has erroneously targeted many other people of color—and that more cases may soon emerge. “It’s not comprehensive to different cultures and colors,” he said of the software. “The designers of the algorithm are white folks, so it’s narrow; it works for the majority race.” Robinson now suspects the Detroit facial recognition technology has erroneously targeted many other people of color—and that more cases may soon emerge. “It’s not comprehensive to different cultures and colors,” he said of the software. “The designers of the algorithm are white folks, so it’s narrow; it works for the majority race.”

In the case of Robert Julian-Borchak Willams, the Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office apologized after the New York Times ran the story. Detroit Police Chief James Craig later admitted the technology misidentified suspects in 96 percent of cases. In the case of Robert Julian-Borchak Willams, the Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office apologized after the New York Times ran the story. Detroit Police Chief James Craig later admitted the technology misidentified suspects in 96 percent of cases.

Oliver, for his part, won’t be satisfied with a mea culpa. Oliver, for his part, won’t be satisfied with a mea culpa.. REVERB is a documentary series from CBS Reports. Watch the latest episode, "A City Under Surveillance," in the video player above.

In July of 2019, Michael Oliver, 26, was on his way to work in Ferndale, Michigan, when a cop car pulled him over. The officer informed him that there was a felony warrant out for his arrest.

"I thought he was joking because he was laughing," recalled Oliver. "But as soon as he took me out of my car and cuffed me, I knew this wasn't a joke." Shortly thereafter, Oliver was transferred to Detroit police custody and charged with larceny.

Months later, at a pre-trial hearing, he would finally see the evidence against him — a single screen-grab from a video of the incident, taken on the accuser's cellphone. Oliver, who has an oval-shaped face and a number of tattoos, shared few physical characteristics with the person in the photo.

"He looked nothing like me," Oliver said. "He didn't even have tattoos." The judge agreed, and the case was promptly dismissed.

Michael Oliver was wrongly accused of a crime based on facial recognition technology. CBS News

It was nearly a year later that Oliver learned his wrongful arrest was based on an erroneous match using controversial facial recognition technology. Police took a still image from a video of the incident and ran it through a software program manufactured by a company called DataWorks Plus. The software measures various points on a person's face — the space between their eyes, the slope of their nose — to generate a unique "face print." The Detroit Police Department then checks for a possible match in a database of photos; the system can access thousands of mugshots as well as the Michigan state database of driver's license photos.

Oliver's face came up as a match, but it wasn't him, and there was plenty of evidence to prove it wasn't.

Facial recognition technology has become commonplace in our society. It's used to unlock our cellphones and to enhance airport security. But many view it as flawed technology that has the potential to cause serious harm. It misidentifies Black and Brown faces at rates substantially higher than their White counterparts, in some cases nearly 100% of the time. And that's especially relevant in a city like Detroit, where nearly 80% of residents are Black.

"I think the perception that data is neutral has gotten us into a lot of trouble," said Tawana Petty, a digital activist who works with the Detroit Equity Action Lab. "The algorithms are programmed by White men using data gathered from racist policies. It's replicating racial bias that starts with humans and then is programmed into technology."

Petty points out that more than a dozen other cities, including San Francisco and Boston, have banned such technology because of concerns about civil liberties and privacy. She has advocated for a similar ban in Detroit. Instead, the city voted in October to renew the contract with DataWorks.

Even supporters acknowledge that the system has a high error rate. Detroit Police Chief James Craig said in June, "If we were just to use the technology by itself, to identify someone" — which he noted would be against department policy — "I would say 96% of the time it would misidentify."

Detroit police use a network of surveillance cameras and facial recognition technology. CBS News

Oliver's case follows the wrongful arrest of Robert Williams, 42, who was also arrested in 2019 for a crime he did not commit, based on the same algorithmic software.

Petty believes that with this technology the human costs far outweigh the benefits. "Yes, innovation is inevitable," she said. "But this wouldn't be the first time we've pulled back on something that we realize wasn't good for the greater of humanity."

Oliver still hasn't recovered from the fallout of his wrongful arrest. "I missed work for trial dates. Then I lost my job." Without an income, he couldn't make rent on his home or car payments, and soon he lost those too. A year later he is effectively homeless, couch-surfing with friends and family, and desperately seeking a new job.

In July, Oliver filed a lawsuit against the city of Detroit for at least $12 million. The lawsuit accuses Detroit Police of using "failed facial recognition technology knowing the science of facial recognition has a substantial error rate among black and brown persons of ethnicity which would lead to the wrongful arrest and incarceration of persons in that ethnic demographic."

The police department has acknowledged that the lead investigator on the case didn't perform the due diligence they should have before making the arrest.

"We sent the image to the detective. But then from there, the detective has to go out and actually look at the photo and compare it to any other information," said Andrew Rutebuka, head of the Crime Intelligence Unit that uses the technology. Investigators are trained to follow the facts, as they would in any other case, such as confirming the whereabouts of the person at the time the crime happened, or matching any other records. "The software just provides the lead," said Rutebuka. "The detective has to do their position of the work and actually follow up."

Since Oliver's arrest, the Detroit Police Department has revised its policy on using facial recognition software. Now it can only be used in the instance of a violent crime. Detroit has the fourth highest murder rate in the nation and the department maintains that the program is helping to solve cases that would otherwise go cold.

Some local families support the technology. Marsheda Holloway credits the system with helping unravel the murder of her 29-year-old cousin Denzel by retracing where he went and who he was with before he was killed.

"I never want another family to go through what me and my family went through," she said. "If facial recognition can help, we all need it. Everybody needs something."

But Michael Oliver isn't sure the software is worth it. "I used to be able to take care of my family," he said. "I want my old life back."

Advocates believe there are dozens of similar cases of wrongful arrests, but they are difficult to identify because the police department isn't required to share when matches were made using facial recognition software.

"Hopefully I win my case," Oliver said. "I don't want anyone else to go through this."