Police in Louisiana reportedly relied on an incorrect facial recognition match to secure warrants to arrest a Black man for thefts he did not commit.

Randal Reid, 28, was in jail for almost a week after the false match led to his arrest, according to a report published Monday on NOLA.com, the website of the Times-Picayune/New Orleans Advocate newspaper. Reid told the newspaper that he had never even been to Louisiana:

Local police pulled over Reid on Nov. 25 as he drove on Interstate 20 in DeKalb County, Georgia, headed to a late Thanksgiving celebration with his mother, he said. "They told me I had a warrant out of Jefferson Parish. I said, 'What is Jefferson Parish?,'" Reid said. "I have never been to Louisiana a day in my life. Then they told me it was for theft. So not only have I not been to Louisiana, I also don't steal." Reid was booked into the DeKalb County jail as a fugitive but was let go on Dec. 1, a jail official said.

Reid's lawyer, Tommy Calogero, said that Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office detectives "tacitly" admitted the error and rescinded the warrant, the report said. "I think they realized they went out on a limb making an arrest based on a face," Calogero said.

“Police could have checked his height and weight”

Describing his time in jail, Reid said he was "not eating, not sleeping. I'm thinking about these charges. Not doing anything because I don't know what's really going on the whole time. They didn't even try to make the right ID."

The case reportedly began with a June 2022 theft of more than $10,000 worth of Chanel and Louis Vuitton purses in Metairie, Louisiana. Calogero said it wouldn't have been hard to determine that Reid wasn't the culprit, who was reportedly "caught on camera in June entering numbers from a stolen credit card at the register" in the store.

Advertisement

A mole on Reid's face was one of the differences that ultimately forced police to release him, Calogero said. Calogero also "estimated a 40-pound difference between Reid and the purse thief he saw in surveillance footage," the Times-Picayune/New Orleans Advocate report said. The culprit, unlike Reid, had "flabby arms."

"Police could have checked his height and weight or made an effort to speak to him or asked to walk through his house to look for evidence. He would have complied," Calogero told the newspaper.

It's not clear exactly what facial recognition was used in this case. In previous cases, Jefferson Parish Sheriff Joe Lopinto's office requested facial recognition analyses through the Louisiana State Analytic and Fusion Exchange in Baton Rouge, which uses Clearview AI and MorphoTrak systems, the report said.

Clearview software compares faces to pictures on social media and many other sources. "Our platform, powered by facial recognition technology, includes the largest known database of 30+ billion facial images sourced from public-only web sources, including news media, mugshot websites, public social media, and other open sources," the company's website says.

Sheriff’s office denied newspaper’s request for warrant

The Times-Picayune/New Orleans Advocate report indicates that the wrong facial recognition match led to two warrants for Reid's arrest. The first was obtained by the Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office, and the second was for a separate crime being investigated by Baton Rouge police.

"A Baton Rouge Police Department detective then adopted JPSO's identification of Reid to secure an arrest warrant alleging he was among three men involved in another luxury purse theft the same week at a shop on Jefferson Highway, court records show," the Times-Picayune/New Orleans Advocate report said.

The report said Lopinto's office did not respond to requests for information and "denied a formal request for the July 18 arrest warrant for Reid and copies of policies or purchases related to facial recognition, citing an ongoing investigation." The separate warrant obtained by Baton Rouge police "does not say how Lopinto's office identified Reid," the report said.

We contacted the Sheriff's office today and will update this article if we get any new information.

Privacy concerns and evidence of bias in facial recognition systems have fueled a movement to ban government use of the technology. "Facial recognition software is particularly bad at recognizing African-Americans and other ethnic minorities, women, and young people, often misidentifying or failing to identify them, disparately impacting certain groups," the Electronic Frontier Foundation says.. Close Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.. NEW ORLEANS (AP) — Louisiana authorities’ use of facial recognition technology led to the mistaken-identity arrest of a Georgia man on a fugitive warrant, an attorney said in a case that renews attention to racial disparities in the use of the digital tool.

Randall Reid, 28, was jailed in late November in DeKalb County, Georgia, The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate reported.

His attorney, Tommy Calogero, said authorities erroneously linked Reid to purse thefts in Jefferson Parish and Baton Rouge. Reid, arrested on Nov. 25, was released Dec. 1.

Reid is Black, and his arrest brings new attention to the use of a technology critics say results in a higher rate of misidentification of people of color than of white people.

“They told me I had a warrant out of Jefferson Parish. I said, ‘What is Jefferson Parish?’” Reid said. “I have never been to Louisiana a day in my life. Then they told me it was for theft. So not only have I not been to Louisiana, I also don’t steal.”

Calogero said Reid was falsely linked to the June theft of luxury purses from a consignment shop in Metairie, a New Orleans suburb in Jefferson Parish.

A Baton Rouge Police Department detective then adopted the Jefferson Parish Sheriff’s Office’s identification of Reid to secure an arrest warrant alleging he was among three men involved in another luxury purse theft the same week, court records show, according to the newspaper.

Differences, such as a mole on Reid’s face, prompted the Jefferson sheriff to rescind the warrant, said Calogero, who estimated a 40-pound difference between Reid and the purse thief in surveillance footage.

Jefferson Sheriff Joe Lopinto’s office did not respond to several requests for information from The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate on Reid’s arrest and release, the agency’s use of facial recognition or any safeguards around it.

The agency did not immediately respond to a request, emailed Monday by The Associated Press, for comment on the story and information on the use of the technology.

Reid’s case brings renewed attention to the use of facial recognition tools in Louisiana and elsewhere.

Facial recognition systems have faced criticism because of their mass surveillance capabilities, which raise privacy concerns, and because some studies have shown that the technology is far more likely to misidentify Black and other people of color than white people, which has resulted in mistaken arrests.

Police in New Orleans say facial recognition can be used only to generate leads and that officers must get approval from department officials before lodging a request through the Louisiana State Analytic and Fusion Exchange in Baton Rouge. Under the latest city rules, all possible matches must undergo a peer review by other facial recognition investigators.

Legislation to restrict the use of facial recognition statewide died in a 2021 legislative session.. A Georgia man was falsely arrested in November after Louisiana officers used a facial recognition tool to identify him as a fugitive, according to The Associated Press. Significant differences in facial features and weight led to the man being freed. However, this incident points to another way in which officers falsely identify Black suspects.



Sometimes when the automatic sink refuses to work or iPhone face recognition won’t unlock, it reminds us that technology was designed to recognize white skin. Now, imagine the same flaw in a tool used to arrest people for a crime. Twenty-eight year old Randall Reid fell victim to this bug. AP reports Reid was sent to jail in Dekalb County on a fugitive warrant for a purse theft that happened in Jefferson Parish Louisiana.

Read more

‘What is Jefferson Parish?’” Reid said via Nola.com. “I have never been to Louisiana a day in my life. Then they told me it was for theft. So not only have I not been to Louisiana, I also don’t steal.”

Reid’s mole on his face and the 40-pound difference between him and the real thief caught on surveillance cam caused the Jefferson Parish sheriff to rescind the warrant, per Reid’s attorney, Tommy Calogero.

This scenario isn’t foreign. There was once a Black man who was arrested on the warrant of a white man because they had the same name. However, the racial disparities in technology need to be addressed before being launched in communities of color. In 2020, IBM, Amazon and Microsoft paused the sale of their facial recognition devices to the police in acknowledgement that their technology enforced police abuse in Black communities, per the ACLU. San Francisco and several cities in Massachusetts have banned facial recognition technology from being used by police departments for the same reason, per WBUR.

Also, this problem goes wayyy back to slavery (doesn’t everything?). In a report from Harvard University, Alex Najibi writes that lantern laws requiring enslaved people to carry lights at night were in fact a version of facial recognition. He then recalls the FBI’s hawk-eye surveillance of our Black civil rights leaders or ICE’s surveillance of undocumented immigrants and Muslim citizens.

Read more on anti-Black tech from Harvard University’s Science in the News:

Discriminatory law enforcement practices were highlighted following the murder of George Floyd by the Minneapolis PD. Black Americans are more likely to be arrested and incarcerated for minor crimes than White Americans. Consequently, Black people are overrepresented in mugshot data, which face recognition uses to make predictions. The Black presence in such systems creates a feed-forward loop whereby racist policing strategies lead to disproportionate arrests of Black people, who are then subject to future surveillance. For example, the NYPD maintains a database of 42,000 “gang affiliates” – 99% Black and Latinx – with no requirements to prove suspected gang affiliation. In fact, certain police departments use gang member identification as a productivity measure, incentivizing false reports. For participants, inclusion in these monitoring databases can lead to harsher sentencing and higher bails– or denial of bail altogether.

Advanced technology may seem like a convenient or efficient way to do a job. But it’s no use if it is tainted with racial bias. Not only do white people mix Black people up with one another. Now the computers do too.



More from The Root

Sign up for The Root's Newsletter. For the latest news, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Click here to read the full article.. Randall Reid says he’s never even been to Louisiana, much less stolen $10,000 worth of Chanel and Louis Vuitton handbags there. That didn’t stop police from arresting the 28-year-old Georgia resident for the theft, committed in a New Orleans suburb, based on an algorithmic guess at what his face looked like. Reid was on the way to a belated Thanksgiving dinner with his mother when the cops picked him up, three states and seven hours away from the scene of the crime. He was locked up for nearly a week.



Disney World's Tron Coaster Is a Must-Ride Experience CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video Disney World's Tron Coaster Is a Must-Ride Experience

A facial recognition tool identified Reid as a suspect in the theft of the luxury purses, and that was all the cops needed to put him in jail, according to the New Orleans Advocate. According to Reid’s lawyer Tommy Calogero, he’s a good 40 pounds lighter than the criminal in the surveillance tape. Law enforcement let him go and admitted the false match “tacitly,” Calogero said.

Advertisement

“I think they realized they went out on a limb making an arrest based on a face,” Calogero told the Advocate.t

Facial recognition, though useful, is far from perfect. Numerous studies show the technology is especially inaccurate when identifying people of color and women compared to identifications of white men. Some law enforcement officials regularly acknowledge this fact, saying facial recognition is only suitable to generate leads and should never be used as the sole basis for arrest warrants. But there are very few rules governing the technology. Cops often ignore that advice and take face recognition at face value.

Advertisement

Reid is only the latest seemingly innocent Black man to wind up in jail as a result of facial recognition’s errors. The technology has led to at least three wrongful arrests, and using facial recognition as the only justification to put suspects behind bars is a troubling and growing trend, according to Clare Garvie, training resource counsel with the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.



“Facial recognition offers the promise of accurate and speedy identification in circumstances where law enforcement might not have other ways to identify suspects, but that assumption has never been tested or confirmed,” Garvie said. “When law enforcement officials use the technology as the sole basis for arrests, they are relying on unproven methods.”



Advertisement

Our world is absolutely saturated with facial recognition technology and other biometric sensors. But we don’t know how these tools are used, or under what circumstances. Last year, 13 out of 14 federal government agencies told Congress they have no idea how often they use facial recognition technology, or even which of their employees have access to it.



This time last year, it seemed like there was a growing movement to ban law enforcement’s use of technology, with legislatures across the country instituting a facial recognition prohibition for their police forces. But that movement lost steam, and a number of states and cities quietly undid their face recognition bans, including California, Virginia, and—you guessed it—New Orleans.

Advertisement

New Orleans—which borders Metairie, LA, where Reid was accused of theft—has rules about how police use facial recognition. By law, all possible matches have to go through peer review by other facial recognition investigators, and police policy says the tech should only be used to generate leads. But in Metairie, the rest of Louisiana, and most of the country, law enforcement officials can use facial recognition without restriction. In most cases, prosecutors don’t even have to disclose that facial recognition was involved in investigations when suspects make it to court.



That violates defendants constitutional rights, Garvie maintains. The so-called Brady Rule requires that prosecutors disclose evidence that could held a defendant’s case. Because facial recognition is so inaccurate, Garvie said that should apply whenever the technology is used. But so far, the court system hasn’t adopted that logic.

Advertisement

Law enforcement agencies’ use of facial recognition goes back 20 years. We have no idea how many people are in prison thanks to the flawed technology, experts told Gizmodo.



“Unfortunately, Randall Reid will not be the last person falsely arrested due police use of facial recognition technology,” said Evan Selinger, scholar-in-residence at Surveillance Technology Oversight Project. “When there’s a political need to be seen as committed to decisive action, high-tech options—even deeply flawed and highly controversial ones—can have good short-term optics.”

Advertisement

The Baton Rouge Police Department, which issued the warrant for his arrest, has been tight-lipped about the case. According to the Advocate, the department denied a formal request for the arrest warrant and hasn’t disclosed details about its facial recognition policies.

For the better part of a century, an untold number of people were convicted of crimes using bogus forensic science like bite mark analysis and hair analysis. With facial recognition, it seems we may be heading down the same path: the US is waiting for case law to determine how cops should and shouldn’t use facial recognition technology. That means innocent people will go to jail for crimes they didn’t commit while we sit and watch them fight their way through the court system.. Louisiana Cops Use Facial Recognition Tech To Arrest The Wrong Person For String Of Robberies

from the fitting-the-description-when-you-don't-fit-the-description dept

This is always going to be a thing with facial recognition. Hundreds of algorithms have been tested. Pretty much every single one does worse “recognizing” minorities than it does recognizing the predominant deployers of facial recognition tech: white males.

In 2020, the Detroit PD managed to rack up consecutive false arrests by relying far too heavily on the conclusions (badly) drawn by its facial recognition tech. This PD will rack up more false arrests in the future, seeing as its tech is wrong nearly 100% of the time.

Cops in New Jersey did the same thing later that year, arresting a man who voluntarily showed up at the station after being surprised to learn there was a warrant out for his arrest. The victim spent 10 days in jail and then the rest of his personal savings clearing his name.

The next headline-making misfire by facial recognition tech takes us down south, where the go-getters at two Louisiana law enforcement agencies combined forces to fuck up.

[A] recent attempt by the Jefferson Parish Sheriff’s Office to nab a high-end purse thief via facial recognition ended badly for a Georgia man who was jailed for almost a week over a false match, his lawyer says. A detective took the algorithm at face value to secure a warrant to arrest Randal Reid, 28, in the June theft of luxury purses from a Metairie consignment shop, attorney Tommy Calogero said. A Baton Rouge Police Department detective then adopted JPSO’s identification of Reid to secure an arrest warrant alleging he was among three men involved in another luxury purse theft the same week at a shop on Jefferson Highway, court records show.

This “adoption” of a mismatch made its way into the hands of Georgia law enforcement. Officers in Dekalb County, Georgia pulled over Reid and surprised him with the news he was wanted for robberies committed in a state he’d never visited. He was booked into the county jail on November 25. He was finally released on December 1, after the Jefferson Parish Sheriff’s Office “rescinded” the warrant.

Now, Reid’s lawyer does admit the facial match was pretty close, calling his client a “spitting facial image.” But it’s not just faces that need to match. The rest of the description should match as well. And that’s where things diverge. The suspect captured on store cameras was at least 40 pounds heavier. The suspect also did not have a mole on his face, like Reid does. Unless officers were inclined to believe Reid lost 40 pounds in five months while growing a mole on his face, Reid should have been released immediately.

But that didn’t happen. And it shows yet another problem with relying solely on facial recognition tech to obtain arrest warrants: the only thing this tech looks at is faces. There’s a lot more to a person than the set of physical features residing above the neck.

Then there’s the rest of the ridiculousness surrounding this screw up. Law enforcement officers don’t mind being wrong. That’s just another attack vector for warrantless searches and cash seizures. They just hate it when everybody else finds out that they’re wrong. That’s when they go into lockdown mode, preventing the press from accessing anything that might further expose their careless patterns and practices.

Sheriff Joe Lopinto’s office did not respond to several requests for information on Reid’s arrest and release, the agency’s use of facial recognition or any safeguards around it. That office also denied a formal request for the July 18 arrest warrant for Reid and copies of policies or purchases related to facial recognition, citing an ongoing investigation. Baton Rouge police also did not respond to questions about its warrant for Reid’s arrest.

When cops score a win, they can’t stop talking about it. When things go badly, they refuse to engage with the same press they rely on to reprint press releases touting their latest triumph over evil. It’s always the same and it never gets any less annoying or stupid.

However, NOLA did manage to obtain something that’s probably going to be useful to Reid and his ongoing lawsuit.

The warrant, signed by 19th Judicial District Judge Eboni Rose, does not say how Lopinto’s office identified Reid.

That looks like a pretty serious omission. It’s going to be pretty difficult for officers to claim they acted in good faith when the warrant was obtained in bad faith. And it may get worse for the JPSO if future document releases show the agency plays fast and loose with facial recognition matches, considering nearly every tech provider warns law enforcement agencies matches should never be used as the sole basis for arrests.

Occasional failures by facial recognition tech shouldn’t just be brushed aside as the inevitable outcome of widespread use. These tools are touted as being better than fallible humans at identifying suspects. But cases like these show the tech is little better than the officers using it, who far too often decide most black men look alike so why not just arrest the next one officers come across. We need tools that make police better, more accurate, and less likely to default to their biases. So far, though, facial recognition tech is just playing into the preconceptions of officers, but allowing them to blame the machine, rather than their own impulses for blown calls.

Filed Under: arrests, baton rouge, baton rouge pd, dekalb county, facial recognition, georgia, jefferson parish, jefferson parish sheriff's office, joe lopinto, louisiana, randal reid, robberies

