The South Korean Ministry of Justice has provided more than 100 million photos of foreign nationals who travelled through the country’s airports to facial recognition companies without their consent, according to attorneys with the non-governmental organization The South Korean Ministry of Justice has provided more than 100 million photos of foreign nationals who travelled through the country’s airports to facial recognition companies without their consent, according to attorneys with the non-governmental organization Lawyers for a Democratic Society

While the use of facial recognition technology has become common for governments across the world, advocates in South Korea are calling the practice a “human rights disaster” that is relatively While the use of facial recognition technology has become common for governments across the world, advocates in South Korea are calling the practice a “human rights disaster” that is relatively unprecedented

Advertisement

“It’s unheard-of for state organizations—whose duty it is to manage and control facial recognition technology—to hand over biometric information collected for public purposes to a private-sector company for the development of technology,” six civic groups “It’s unheard-of for state organizations—whose duty it is to manage and control facial recognition technology—to hand over biometric information collected for public purposes to a private-sector company for the development of technology,” six civic groups said during a press conference last week.

The revelation, first The revelation, first reported in the South Korean newspaper The Hankyoreh, came to light after National Assembly member Park Joo-min requested and received documents from the Ministry of Justice related to a April 2019 project titled Artificial Intelligence and Tracking System Construction Project. The documents show private companies secretly used biometric data to research and develop an advanced immigration screening system that would utilize artificial intelligence to automatically identify airport users’ identities through CCTV surveillance cameras and detect dangerous situations in real time.

Shortly after the discovery, Shortly after the discovery, civil liberty groups announced plans to represent both foreign and domestic victims in a lawsuit.

“We, the NGOs, urge the government to immediately stop the establishment of a biometric monitoring system that is not only illegal but also significantly violates international human rights norms,” wrote Advocates for Public Interest Law, MINBYUN - Lawyers for a Democratic Society, the Institute for Digital Rights, the Joint Committee with Migrants in Korea, and the Korean Progressive Network Jinbonet, in a “We, the NGOs, urge the government to immediately stop the establishment of a biometric monitoring system that is not only illegal but also significantly violates international human rights norms,” wrote Advocates for Public Interest Law, MINBYUN - Lawyers for a Democratic Society, the Institute for Digital Rights, the Joint Committee with Migrants in Korea, and the Korean Progressive Network Jinbonet, in a press release that was translated and provided to Motherboard. Attorneys claim the project directly violates South Korea’s Personal Information Protection Act , a law that strictly limits the processing of personal information in the country. Still, the Ministry has yet to announce plans to halt the program , which was scheduled to be completed in 2022.

Advertisement

The practice of buying and selling human biometric data for use in scientific studies without an individual’s consent has a long history. In the 1950’s, cancer researchers at Johns Hopkins Hospital infamously harvested the cells of The practice of buying and selling human biometric data for use in scientific studies without an individual’s consent has a long history. In the 1950’s, cancer researchers at Johns Hopkins Hospital infamously harvested the cells of Henrietta Lacks , a Black woman who had been admitted to the hospital for vaginal bleeding. Without her knowledge, the cells were later reproduced, and have been critical to a range of major medical advancements since the mid 20th century.

News of the South Korean facial recognition data comes amid an ongoing battle over the use of the technology. Numerous studies, including from the US government, have shown the technology to be News of the South Korean facial recognition data comes amid an ongoing battle over the use of the technology. Numerous studies, including from the US government, have shown the technology to be racist and unreliable, and civil rights advocates have noted that facial recognition is deployed disproportionately against immigrants and communities of color.. A project intended to develop an artificial intelligence-powered facial recognition system to be used for airport immigration purposes, spearheaded by South Korea’s Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Science and Information and Communication Technology, has met with fierce criticism from civil rights groups and opposition politicians in the country.

Hani reports that work on the face biometrics identification and tracking system has been ongoing since 2019 but further concern has been sparked by reports that the government handed over at least 170 million face photographs of Koreans and foreigners to a private company to train AI algorithms for the surveillance system.

The fear is that the biometric information of those concerned could be compromised and their privacy rights violated.

As a consequence, some six rights groups including People’s Solidarity for Participatory Democracy (PSPD), MINBYUN-Lawyers for a Democratic Society, and the Institute for Digital Rights, have called on the government to halt the facial recognition project, arguing that it violates the country’s Personal Information Protection Act as well as international human rights norms.

Speaking during a recent press conference in Seoul, reports Hani, the groups lambasted the move, calling it “a devastating infringement” on privacy rights.

“Facial information and other biometric data aren’t easily altered and are unique to the individuals concerned. If this data were to be leaked, it would constitute a devastating infringement upon their privacy. It’s unheard of for state organizations — whose duty it is to manage and control facial recognition technology — to hand over biometric information collected for public purposes to a private-sector company for the development of technology,” the groups were quoted as saying during the briefing.

Further supporting their argument on why the project is dangerous for Koreans, they drew this example: “The U.S. and the EU view AI facial recognition as a dangerous technology and have recently been developing measures to regulate remote monitoring systems that make use of biometric information. Civil society is waiting to hear a responsible answer from the Ministry of Justice that includes halting the project [to build] the AI identification and tracking system and the development of follow-up measures.”

As part of their efforts to see this project reversed, Hani notes that the groups have sought an audience with the Justice Minister to further make known their position.

Meanwhile, the Minister is reported to have earlier given assurances during a parliamentary audit that the project will be conducted in a way that will not compromise citizens’ personal information.

South Korea’s Personal Information Protection Commission in August slammed a heavy fine on Facebook for violating facial recognition consent rules. The Commission has yet to weigh in on the government’s indiscriminate biometric data-sharing.

Article Topics

AI | airports | biometric data | data protection | data sharing | ethics | facial recognition | privacy | research and development | South Korea. The South Korean government shared roughly 170 million face images of citizens and resident foreign nationals with the private sector without their consent to be used in training and testing biometric algorithms, according to a recent Ministry of Justice document.

The report was seen by Hankyoreh, and describes the capture and handling of face biometric data collected at Incheon International Airport, according to materials handed to Democratic Party National Assembly Member Park Joo-min

The move is part of an “AI identification and tracking system development project” based on a memorandum of understanding between the Korean Ministry of Justice (MOJ) and the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT).

Scheduled for completion in 2022, the project has seen the MOJ transferring information obtained during the immigration screening process to the MSIT, including face biometrics, nationality, gender, and age.

The MSIT subsequently transferred that information to private businesses for the purpose of artificial intelligence technology research, according to the allegations.

The South Korean government mentioned the creation of the project in a press release when it first launched in 2019 but did not disclose information about its structure, scope, or data collection methods.

Of the facial images collected, 100 million were used for “AI learning” and another 20 million for “algorithm testing.”

Noticeably, the Korean Immigration Act only allows the MOJ to collect or store face and fingerprint biometrics of citizens who have applied to use the automated immigration clearance service introduced in 2008.

Despite this, this MOJ has installed a total of 88 cameras around the Incheon Airport immigration area, 50 of which have face biometrics capabilities.

According to Hankyoreh, the MSIT-affiliated National IT Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA) is currently planning the deployment of more than 100 additional cameras in the immigration area and its glass booths. The cameras feature one-to-many facial recognition technology.

“A comparison between photographs taken by closed-circuit cameras and existing database images is used to confirm whether [the person in the photograph] is a registered international passenger, and the database is searched until the person who appears in the captured image is found,” NIPA explained.

Still, in the recent document obtained by Park Joo-min’s office, the MOJ explained that while the collection of images fell within the scope of the project, the consent of the subjects was not obtained.

“An AI identification and tracking system may be helpful to some extent in making immigration reviews easier and maintaining security within airports,” Park explained.

“But if this project involved the handling of individuals’ sensitive information without their consent and without any special regulations to serve as its basis, then we need to immediately reexamine its legality,” he concluded.

Minister of Justice Park Beom-kye expressed surprise at the biometric data-sharing, and pledged minimal use of the resulting technology, within the scope of legal immigration checks. He also said the project cannot be retracted or canceled.

A privacy advocacy group, meanwhile, has announced plans to launch a class action suit over alleged violation of the country’s Personal Information Protection Act.

Article Topics

AI | algorithms | biometric identification | biometrics | biometrics research | data protection | ethics | face biometrics | face photo | facial recognition | privacy | South Korea | training. . 