. DURHAM, N.C. — ShotSpotter technology has been available for only two weeks in parts of Durham -- but didn't activate — ShotSpotter technology has been available for only two weeks in parts of Durham -- but didn't activate during a mass shooting over the weekend

WRAL News spent the day looking into why the ShotSpotter didn't activate.

The shooting on North Miami Boulevard occurred within the area the ShotSpotter technology is supposed to detect gun shots.

"However, my understanding is that there wasn't a corresponding ShotSpotter report," said Mayor Pro Tem Mark-Anthony Middleton.

Middleton says there may a good reason the gunfire detection technology did not notify police.

"If it was indeed a drive by shooting, the technology is not designed to pick up acoustical signatures from inside a vehicle or a building," he said. "And if you combine a vehicle, and moving as well, the sensors aren't really designed or attenuated to pick up those type of incidents."

Middleton explains that the technology is working as expected in this type of incident.

He says anecdotal evidence he's seen shows ShotSpotter is working, but he emphasizes that it's only one tool in the toolbox.

"I believe that we're finally putting the pieces in place where we can look our people in the eye and have the moral authority to say we are literally trying everything in our power," he said. "But there's still more work to be done."

After being reelected, Durham District Attorney Satana Deberry was sworn into office on Tuesday.

WRAL News asked her about the recent violence among young people.

"I think there are literally hundreds of people in Durham County who want to see that change," said Deberry.

Deberry points out - the District Attorney's office doesn't get involved until after a crime, but it still has a role.

NO TITLE PROVIDED

"What our commitment to do is to be good community partners, making sure the most vulnerable people in our community are safe. Whether that means being involved with diversion programs so that people are not involved with the criminal justice system to begin with, and have the opportunities for school, and jobs, that’s what were committed to do," said Deberry.

WRAL News has reached out to ShotSpotter for comment but have not heard back.

Victims in the weekend's mass shooting range in age from 17 to 24. All of them are expected to survive.

Police say the drive-by shooting does not appear to be random.. In a new effort to curb gun violence, Durham City Council approved room in the 2022-23 budget for ShotSpotter, an automatic gunfire detection technology. Courtesy of KPBS.

A controversial gunfire detection software that Durham is piloting failed to notify police after a drive-by shooting outside of a Subway restaurant in east Durham on Jan. 1.

One juvenile and one adult were hospitalized with serious injuries while the other three victims were treated for non-life-threatening injuries. The police have said that all victims are expected to survive.

The shooting, which occurred on North Miami Boulevard, fell within the three square miles that the gunfire detection software, called ShotSpotter, was monitoring. The area, which represents only 2.7% of the total landmass of the city, is where roughly one in three gunshot wounds occur.

“We did not receive a ShotSpotter alert for this shooting incident. DPD has been in contact with ShotSpotter representatives and their engineers are going to look into the incident,” a police spokesperson told the News & Observer on Wednesday.

In its contract with Durham, ShotSpotter promised a certain level of gunfire detection excluding the 48 hours surrounding New Year’s Eve and July 4 because fireworks are widely used. Therefore, this failure of detection will not count against the company’s commitment. The contract also specifies that a shooting is detectable only if it occurs “fully outdoors in free space” with no silencer being used.

"If it was indeed a drive by shooting, the technology is not designed to pick up acoustical signatures from inside a vehicle or a building," Mayor Pro Tem Mark-Anthony Middleton told WRAL News. "And if you combine a vehicle, and moving as well, the sensors aren't really designed or attenuated to pick up those type of incidents."

In 2022, 247 people were shot in Durham. The county began its one-year pilot of ShotSpotter technology on Dec. 15 after several months of delays. The system relies on sensors placed on buildings that notify police if gunshots are detected, bringing police to an area even when a 911 call is not made. When the sensors are triggered, audio is sent to ShotSpotter’s “Incident Review Center” where it is manually confirmed as gunfire or explosions.

“Our hearts go out to the community impacted by the recent mass shooting that took place over the weekend in Durham, NC. We are investigating the incident and intend on providing a full report to Durham Police Department,” a ShotSpotter spokesperson said in an email to the News & Observer.

ShotSpotter technology has been a recent subject of controversy both in Durham and in the several other cities in which the technology is being used. In September, the Durham school board voted to prohibit ShotSpotter from installing its sensors on school campuses, four of which fell within the 3 square miles being monitored by the technology. One board member called the technology an “item of surveillance” that would send the wrong message to students. Concerns have also been raised that the technology would bring a heavy police presence to certain neighborhoods while potentially increasing instances of racial profiling. A study conducted by Northwestern University’s MacArthur Justice Center found that most ShotSpotter alerts did not result in police reports of crime and instead “[sent] police on thousands of unfounded and high-intensity deployments, which are focused almost exclusively on Black and Latinx communities.”

Get The Chronicle straight to your inbox Signup for our weekly newsletter. Cancel at any time. Email Address. . In a new effort to curb gun violence, Durham City Council approved room in the 2022-23 budget for ShotSpotter, an automatic gunfire detection technology. Courtesy of KPBS.

A pair of deadly shootings recently went undetected by ShotSpotter, the controversial gunshot detection technology currently being piloted by the city of Durham. A spokesperson for the Durham Police Department told CBS17 that police did not receive an alert for a Feb. 5 shooting at Fay and Juniper Streets and a shooting last Thursday on Park Avenue. Both shootings resulted in two total deaths.

These reports come a month after a drive-by shooting on New Year’s Day that injured five people also went undetected by ShotSpotter. All three shootings fell within the three square miles that Shotspotter was monitoring. The area represents only 2.7% of the total landmass of the city, but accounts for roughly one in three gunshot wounds.

Durham Mayor Pro Tempore Mark-Anthony Middleton, an early advocate for piloting the technology in Durham, defended its continued usage. He said to CBS17 that it was important to “look at all of the data” given the initiative is currently only two months into the year-long pilot.

“Any specific data point where we miss something is bothersome and disturbing, but we have to keep in mind that this is a piece of technology. My cell phone dropped a call last week, I’m not throwing my cell phone out.” Middleton told CBS17.

According to its monthly report for January, ShotSpotter sent the Durham Police 197 alerts, detecting 998 rounds fired. In its contract with the city, ShotSpotter commits to detecting and locating 90% of unsuppressed outdoor gunfire when the fired rounds are above .25 caliber.

Durham County began its one-year pilot of ShotSpotter last December. The system relies on sensors placed on buildings that can flag sounds that might be gunfire or explosions. The audio is then sent to ShotSpotter’s “Incident Review Center” where it is manually confirmed. Pollice can then be sent to the area.

“We are sending our deepest condolences to the community impacted by the recent shooting that took place in Durham, NC. We have investigated the situation and provided a report to the Durham Police Department,” the company wrote in a statement.

Last September, the Durham school board voted to prohibit ShotSpotter from installing its sensors on school campuses. One board member deemed it an “item of surveillance.” Local residents have also raised concerns that the technology may result in an increased police presence that could make racial profiling a more prevalent issue.

Get The Chronicle straight to your inbox Signup for our weekly newsletter. Cancel at any time. Email Address