ARTICLE TITLE: Footballer's "X-Rated" Comment Created by Instagram's Mistranslation
Argentina star footballer Alexis Mac posted a controversial X-rated message for his WAG Camila Mayan on Instagram following Argentina’s win over France in the FIFA World Cup 2022 final

Lionel Messi-led Argentina managed to win a second historic World Cup trophy over the weekend, after beating France on penalties following a thrilling 3-3 score line after extra time.

Alexis Mac Allister Racy Instagram Comment For Wife Camila Mayan Goes Viral

Mac Allister’s comment on his girlfriends post 🤣🤣🤣 pic.twitter.com/Zw8Ykjs6xM — george (@StokeyyG2) December 19, 2022

I’d comment that too if I was MacAllister pic.twitter.com/WT9uvZQj79 — ed (@UtdEddie) December 19, 2022

Apart from the message, Alexis made a brilliant appearance, helping his side win their first World Cup in 36 years.

A Controversial X-rated Comment

Alexis Mac Allister, Argentina’s new hero seemingly made an X-rated plea to his beautiful WAG after Argentina won their first ever World Cup after a gap of 36 years on Sunday.

As friends and family members celebrated with the players on the pitch after the game, Mac Allister took some photos with his wife, Camila Mayan. Camila then posted those photos on Instagram with a caption, which read:

Advertisement

I love you champion!! No words, we did it! Let’s go Argentina.

The 23-year-old Argentinian who plays for English club Brighton, responded with a controversial comment:

I love you!! Let’s f***kkkkkk!

However, as shocking as it may sound, there is some explaining behind Mac Allister’s X-rated comment.

What Did Mac Allister Mean

Mac Allister’s original comment was in Spanish, and the final line read “Vamos Carajo”. It is a phrase, which has become synonymous with Argentine football since back in the 1990s.

Advertisement

While the literal translation of Mac Allister’s comment means “let’s f***”, the phrase itself has a different meaning. A more accurate translation to “Vamos Carajo” would mean something along the lines of “let’s f***ing go”. Moreover, the phrase is usually followed up with a club or a team’s name in the middle. In the English translation, this would be added to the end of the sentence.

Alexis Mac Allister

Apart from the controversial X-rated message, Alexis Mac Allister stood out on Sunday after playing a key role for Argentina. The Brighton central-midfielder made a bursting run, making the ball roll towards Angel Di Maria who scored a brilliant goal.

As of now, the World Cup winner is still off celebrating the massive victory and his return to the South Coast is still unknown. Mac Allister probably won’t be play for his side’s upcoming clash against Charlton Athletic in the Carabao Cup.

Advertisement

ALSO READ: Chainsaw Man Anime Final Episode 12 Release Date, Time, Where To Watch Ep Eng Sub Online

Recommended: Sports Fan App. Something went wrong, please try again later.

Invalid email Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want the day's sports headlines straight to your inbox? Our FREE newsletter will keep you ahead of the game

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want the day's sports headlines straight to your inbox? Our FREE newsletter will keep you ahead of the game

Argentina midfielder Alexis Mac Allister appeared o leave an X-rated message for his other half on social media after the South American side won the World Cup for the first time since 1986.

In the pandemonium after the game, a jubilant Mac Allister took some snaps with his gorgeous partner Camila Mayan. Camila posted them on Instagram with the caption: "I love you champion!! No words, we did it! Let's go Argentina."

The Brighton man, who is of Irish heritage, responded in cheeky fashion: "I love you!! Let's f***kkkkkk!" However, not all is as it seems with Mac Allister's X-rated comment.

READ MORE:Lionel Messi and Argentina return home as heroes after World Cup win

Mac Allister had commented in Spanish, and the final line read "Vamos Carajo," which has become somewhat of a phrase in Argentine football since the 1990s.

While the literal translation is "let's f***", the phrase really translates to something along the lines of "let's f***ing go." And it's usually accommodated with a club in the middle, which in the English translation would be added to the end.

Mac Allister has emerged as one of the stars of this year's World Cup and played the pass that set Angel Di Maria free to score Argentina's second goal on Sunday.

His Irish roots have also attracted attention. With a name like Mac Allister and a nickname to match (Colo/ginger) many Irish observers wondered whether he had any Irish blood in him.

As it turns out, Mac Allister has strong connections to Ireland and to this very day has family living in Dublin.

While some Irish supporters are hoping that the World Cup trophy may take a visit to the Emerald Isle, Mac Allister's Brighton return to action against Charlton in the Carabao cup on Wednesday.

Unsurprisingly, Mac Allister will be given some time to enjoy the celebrations.

READ NEXT:

Get the latest sports headlines straight to your inbox by signing up for free email alerts