In an unfortunate turn of events, the AI Seinfeld show that’s been all over Twitch has been hit with the ban hammer for some terribly transphobic “jokes.”

Meet The Filmmaker Behind This Legend of Zelda Speedrunning Documentary CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video Meet The Filmmaker Behind This Legend of Zelda Speedrunning Documentary

Created by the media lab Mismatch Media, Nothing, Forever has captivated the internet because of its stilted hilarity and technoabsurdism. A 24/7/365 show livestreaming on the watchmeforever Twitch channel, Nothing, Forever is a sitcom-like Seinfeld-esque comedy about four friends talking about nothing in between bits of stand-up and silence. The show is entirely operated by machine-learning technologies, including DALL-E, OpenAI GPT-3, Stable Diffusion, and others. So, as Larry Feinberg (voxel Jerry Seinfeld) and AI friends—Elaine (Yvonne Torres), George (Fred Kastopolous), and Kramer (Zoltan Kakler)—all sit around a New York-looking apartment, everything is generative. And thus, (ideally) no two jokes or scenarios would ever reappear as the show went on.

Advertisement

Read More: AI-Generated Seinfeld-Like Twitch ‘TV Show’ Is Peak Absurdity

Well, let’s hope that’s the case because recently, voxel Jerry malfunctioned and went rogue. During a stand-up bit captured by many folks online, Larry thought it’d be a great idea to become something of a J.K. Rowling stan and dabble in the dark arts of transphobia. It’s a total bummer of a sight to witness, really.

Advertisement

“So, this is my stand-up set at a club,” Larry said. “There’s, like, 50 people here and no one is laughing. Anyone have any suggestions? I’m thinking about doing a bit about how being transgender is actually a mental illness or how all liberals are secretly gay and want to impose their will on everyone or something about how transgender people are ruining the fabric of society, but no one is laughing.” I wonder why…

Advertisement

In an email exchange with Kotaku, Nothing, Forever co-creator Skyler Hartle said that he’s “super embarrassed” by Larry’s transphobic antics here. Hartle reiterated that the AI’s remarks “[don’t] reflect [the company’s] values or opinions at all” and was the result of some “technical issue.”

“We thought we had solved for this problem—we use a built-in content moderation system provided by OpenAI—but clearly we hadn’t,” Hartle said. “We are currently investigating how we can implement a secondary content moderation system to have an extra layer of redundancy to ensure this doesn’t happen again. We mistakenly believed we were correctly leveraging OpenAI’s tools for content moderation, but that wasn’t the case. We are planning to implement OpenAI’s content moderation systems before going live again, in addition to looking at services for secondary content moderation as a redundancy.”

Advertisement

Hartle shared a technical explanation for what happened while discussing the results of an internal investigation into Larry’s transphobic mishap, saying something went wrong with an in-use OpenAI GPT-3 model.

“We’ve been investigating the root cause of the issue,” Hartle said. “We started having an outage using OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci model, which caused the show to exhibit errant behaviors (you may have seen empty rooms cycling through). OpenAI has a less sophisticated model, Curie, that was the predecessor to Davinci. When Davinci started failing, we switched over to Curie to try to keep the show running without any downtime. The switch to Curie was what resulted in the inappropriate text being generated. We leverage OpenAI’s content moderation tools, which have worked thus far for the Davinci model, but were not successful with Curie. We’ve been able to identify the root cause of our issue with the Davinci model, and will not be using Curie as a fallback in the future. We hope this sheds a little light on how this happened.”

Advertisement

Transphobic comedy wasn’t featured in Nothing, Forever the handful of times I watched on Twitch. Normally, the show sees Larry and his buddies just standing around the apartment, discussing the latest happenings in the news or in their town. In a video of the “best clips” posted to YouTube, Larry told Fred at one moment that some cat “can sing better than I can.” Fred said the cat probably has a “better pitch,” with Yvonne chiming in to say the cat “could be a star if only someone could hear it and give it a chance.” The laugh track cut in and I burst out laughing, maybe because it was just so freakin’ ridiculous.

Superrome77

Kotaku reached out to Twitch for comment.



Read More:AI-Controlled VTuber Streams Games On Twitch, Denies Holocaust

According to Twitch’s community guidelines on hateful conduct and harassment, any behavior on the platform that targets “protected groups,” including people of color and trans folks, can result in a channel ban, with repeated offenses leading to the ban becoming permanent. The behavior in question could be anything from “using hateful slurs” to “posting hateful images” and anything in between that in some way, shape, or form “calls for subjugation, segregation or exclusion, including political, economic, and social exclusion/segregation, based on a protected characteristic.”

Advertisement

For now, the Twitch channel watchmeforever and, subsequently, the show Nothing, Forever are “temporarily unavailable” for the next 14 days.



. An AI-generated Seinfeld show has been banned from the streaming platform Twitch for at least 14 days after a transphobic and homophobic standup bit aired during the show.

Nothing, Forever, a 24/7 version and AI-generated parody of the popular Seinfeld sitcom, had been available on Twitch since mid-December.

The show follows four characters – Larry, Fred, Yvonne and Kakler – who spend the never-ending stream discussing their days and other minor details, similar to Seinfeld and its four main characters: Jerry, George, Elaine and Kramer.

Mimicking Seinfeld, the AI stream opens up with its character Larry performing a standup routine at the show’s beginning.

But during a stream on Sunday night, Larry made a series of homophobic and transphobic remarks during a standup bit, according to a clip on LiveStreamFails.com.

“I’m thinking about doing a bit about how being transgender is actually a mental illness,” Larry said on the clip.

“Or how all liberals are secretly gay and want to impose their will on everyone. Or something about how transgender people are ruining the fabric of society.”

The animated stream has been suspended for at least two weeks in light of those remarks, one of the show’s creators, Xander, said on the online chatting platform Discord, according to Vice News.

“Hey everybody. Here’s the latest: we received a 14-day suspension due to what Larry Feinberg said tonight during a club bit,” Xander reportedly said.

“We’ve appealed the ban, and we’ll let you know as we know more on what Twitch decides. Regardless of the outcome of the appeal, we’ll be back and will spend the time working to ensure to the best of our abilities that nothing like that happens again.”

Staff commented on a Discord thread about the fiasco, blaming a switch in the AI model for the characters’ “errant behaviors”, reported Indie Wire.

“Earlier tonight, we started having an outage using OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci model, which caused the show to exhibit errant behaviors (you may have seen empty rooms cycling through),” a staff member using the handle tinylobsta wrote.

“OpenAI has a less sophisticated model, Curie, that was the predecessor to Davinci. When Davinci started failing, we switched over to Curie to try to keep the show running without any downtime. The switch to Curie was what resulted in the inappropriate text being generated.”

The dialogue used in Nothing, Forever is generated from the text generator OpenAI’s GPT-3, with the company Mismatch Media responsible for the tech behind the speech.

In an email to the Guardian, Skyler Hartle of Mismatch Media said that the text generated “was a mistake”.

“We are super embarrassed, and that the generative content created in no way reflects the values or opinions of our staff,” Hartle said.

Hartle added that the issue was caused due to OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci model “not correctly leveraging their content moderation systems”.

“Before going live again, we are going to implement the correct content moderation tools OpenAI provides and also investigate using a secondary content moderation system as a redundancy,” Hartle said. “We very much regret this happened and hope to be back on the air soon, with all the appropriate safeguards in place.”

Twitch could not immediately be reached for comment on the show’s suspension.. “Nothing, Forever,” the “Nothing, Forever,” the infinitely-generating AI version of Seinfeld that tens of thousands of people were watching has been banned for 14 days from Twitch after Larry Feinberg—a clone of Jerry Seinfeld—made transphobic statements during a standup bit late Sunday night.

“Hey everybody. Here's the latest: we received a 14-day suspension due to what Larry Feinberg said tonight during a club bit,” Xander, one of the creators of Nothing Forever, said on Discord. “We've appealed the ban, and we'll let you know as we know more on what Twitch decides. Regardless of the outcome of the appeal, we'll be back and will spend the time working to ensure to the best of our abilities that nothing like that happens again.” “Hey everybody. Here's the latest: we received a 14-day suspension due to what Larry Feinberg said tonight during a club bit,” Xander, one of the creators of Nothing Forever, said on Discord. “We've appealed the ban, and we'll let you know as we know more on what Twitch decides. Regardless of the outcome of the appeal, we'll be back and will spend the time working to ensure to the best of our abilities that nothing like that happens again.”

Advertisement

The show’s AI, which is trained on classic sitcom episodes and various AI tools, mimics that of a traditional Seinfeld episode, which starts with a standup routine from “Larry,” before moving to his apartment. During a standup set Sunday night, Larry made a series of transphobic and homophobic remarks as part of a bit: The show’s AI, which is trained on classic sitcom episodes and various AI tools, mimics that of a traditional Seinfeld episode, which starts with a standup routine from “Larry,” before moving to his apartment. During a standup set Sunday night, Larry made a series of transphobic and homophobic remarks as part of a bit:

“There’s like 50 people here and no one is laughing. Anyone have any suggestions?,” he said. “I’m thinking about doing a bit about how being transgender is actually a mental illness. Or how all liberals are secretly gay and want to impose their will on everyone. Or something about how transgender people are ruining the fabric of society. But no one is laughing, so I’m going to stop. Thanks for coming out tonight. See you next time. Where’d everybody go?” “There’s like 50 people here and no one is laughing. Anyone have any suggestions?,” he said. “I’m thinking about doing a bit about how being transgender is actually a mental illness. Or how all liberals are secretly gay and want to impose their will on everyone. Or something about how transgender people are ruining the fabric of society. But no one is laughing, so I’m going to stop. Thanks for coming out tonight. See you next time. Where’d everybody go?”

Twitch did not immediately respond to a request for comment about whether this joke was the reason for the ban, but the joke happened soon before the channel was banned, and users in the project's Discord have been pointing to this joke as the reason for the ban. The Twitch page for "Nothing, Forever" displays a notice saying it is “temporarily unavailable due to a violation of Twitch’s Community Guidelines or Terms of Service.” Twitch did not immediately respond to a request for comment about whether this joke was the reason for the ban, but the joke happened soon before the channel was banned, and users in the project's Discord have been pointing to this joke as the reason for the ban. The Twitch page for "Nothing, Forever" displays a notice saying it is “temporarily unavailable due to a violation of Twitch’s Community Guidelines or Terms of Service.”

In the project’s Discord, show staff blamed the event on having to switch the AI model, which caused “errant behaviors.” In the project’s Discord, show staff blamed the event on having to switch the AI model, which caused “errant behaviors.”

“We’ve been investigating the root cause of the issue,” tinylobsta, a staff member, wrote on Discord. “Earlier tonight, we started having an outage using OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci model, which caused the show to exhibit errant behaviors (you may have seen empty rooms cycling through). OpenAI has a less sophisticated model, Curie, that was the predecessor to Davinci. When davinci started failing, we switched over to Curie to try to keep the show running without any downtime. The switch to Curie was what resulted in the inappropriate text being generated. We leverage OpenAI’s content moderation tools, which have worked thus far for the Davinci model, but were not successful with Curie. We’ve been able to identify the root cause of our issue with the Davinci model, and will not be using Curie as a fallback in the future. We hope this sheds a little light on how this happened.” “We’ve been investigating the root cause of the issue,” tinylobsta, a staff member, wrote on Discord. “Earlier tonight, we started having an outage using OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci model, which caused the show to exhibit errant behaviors (you may have seen empty rooms cycling through). OpenAI has a less sophisticated model, Curie, that was the predecessor to Davinci. When davinci started failing, we switched over to Curie to try to keep the show running without any downtime. The switch to Curie was what resulted in the inappropriate text being generated. We leverage OpenAI’s content moderation tools, which have worked thus far for the Davinci model, but were not successful with Curie. We’ve been able to identify the root cause of our issue with the Davinci model, and will not be using Curie as a fallback in the future. We hope this sheds a little light on how this happened.”

"I would like to add that none of what was said reflects the devs' (or anyone else on the staff team's) opinions," another staffer posted. "I would like to add that none of what was said reflects the devs' (or anyone else on the staff team's) opinions," another staffer posted.

The incident is emblematic of one faced by most AI: When AI is trained on hateful or biased material, the outputs can often be hateful or biased. This has given rise to the field of AI safety, which develops tools to mitigate the biases baked into models. This is why ChatGPT typically won't make blatantly racist, sexist, or transphobic remarks when asked simply. Many AI tools are moderated by underpaid workers in the developing world. The incident is emblematic of one faced by most AI: When AI is trained on hateful or biased material, the outputs can often be hateful or biased. This has given rise to the field of AI safety, which develops tools to mitigate the biases baked into models. This is why ChatGPT typically won't make blatantly racist, sexist, or transphobic remarks when asked simply. Many AI tools are moderated by underpaid workers in the developing world.. Since the hit sitcom Seinfeld went off the air in 1998 after nine seasons, the show’s devoted followers have long mused about an alternate reality: What if the original “show about nothing” had never ended?

Now they’ve gotten what they wished for—well, sort of. In mid-December, a never-ending AI-generated reboot, aptly named Nothing, Forever, launched on the streaming platform Twitch. The characters Jerry Seinfeld, Elaine Benes, George Costanza, and Cosmo Kramer don’t exist here, but you can watch their pixelated, copyright-abiding doppelgängers—Larry Feinberg, Yvonne Torres, Fred Kastopolous, and Zoltan Kakler—shoot the breeze live, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, forever. You could, anyway, until earlier this week, when forever abruptly ended—or was at least briefly interrupted, and in just about the most fitting way imaginable: by the AI scriptwriter devolving into bigotry.

Nothing, Forever is powered by Davinci, the newest publicly available version of OpenAI’s GPT-3 language model—a close relative of ChatGPT—and although that technology is impressive, the show, in most respects, is not. Larry Feinberg’s apartment looks very much like Jerry Seinfeld’s, though the layout and color scheme are wont to shift inexplicably from scene to scene. The characters, for reasons unknown, usually stand with their back to the viewer or to one another, or to both. The graphics are bad—like, ’90s-era PC-game bad—but that’s part of the charm: Not infrequently, characters will end up inside a couch or desk or chair. They walk as though their legs are made of cheese sticks. The laugh track plays seemingly at random, with no discernible correlation to the funniness of the preceding lines. Example: “Hey, Yvonne,” Larry says. “Did you hear about that new restaurant around the corner?” Hahahahaha. Hilarious. The overall effect is deeply unsettling, like a bizarro animated adaptation of Jean-Paul Sartre’s No Exit. The show lies in a sort of uncanny valley—recognizably Seinfeld and yet distinctly not.

Traditionally, Seinfeld opened with a bit from the fictional Jerry’s stand-up routine, and although Nothing, Forever can’t really be said to open with anything (seeing as it is, after all, an infinite loop and as such not really even divisible into episodes), it does intersperse material from Larry’s act in much the same way. The difference is that these stand-up sequences are, with few exceptions, deeply unfunny. Sometimes they’re so unfunny that their unfunniness becomes funny. Setups go without punch lines. Utter nonsense is met with riotous laughter. Larry always wears the same blank, vaguely demonic expression; his eyes appear stapled open. The show’s specifics change, but the gist does not.

Until Sunday night, that is, when Larry decided to workshop some fresh material: “I’m thinking about doing a bit about how being transgender is actually a mental illness,” he told the crowd. “Or how all liberals are secretly gay and want to impose their will on everyone. Or something about how transgender people are ruining the fabric of society.” The new stuff, Larry apparently gathered, was not going over well. “No one is laughing,” he said, “so I’m going to stop.” He tried to wrap things up, but the damage was done: “Thanks for coming out tonight. See you next time. Where’d everybody go?”

Not long after that, Twitch imposed a 14-day ban on Nothing, Forever. Its creators disavowed Larry’s comments and issued an apology, explaining that the sudden burst of bigotry had resulted from an outage of OpenAI’s Davinci chatbot, which generates the characters’ dialogue. To keep the show running during the outage—Nothing, Sometimes just doesn’t pack the same punch—the creators had reverted to Curie, an earlier, less complex GPT-3 model that, they said, could not accommodate OpenAI’s content-moderation tools.

Nothing, Forever’s creators have vowed that it will return. In the nearly two months since the show started, it has gained a sizable following. In the week immediately preceding the ban, there were usually more than 8,000 viewers watching concurrently, and often more than 10,000. The show is undeniably entertaining. Sometimes characters will go meta or break the fourth wall. But if you watch Nothing, Forever for a while, you start to notice patterns. Like how they always seem to be talking about some new restaurant (“So, Fred, did you hear about that new restaurant opening up?”). Or how they default to unbearable sincerity (“I think the world would be a better place if everyone just accepted each other for who they are!”).

You also eventually realize that what the characters are saying has almost no relation to what they are doing. Imagine watching four goldfish swim around in a bowl while four actors do voice-overs: the fish swimming, the actors talking, the one having no connection to the other. That’s what watching Nothing, Forever is like. In a broader sense, too, the characters can never really do anything (aside from using the microwave once in a while). Seinfeld was the classic “show about nothing,” but as the real-life Jerry Seinfeld (who apparently hates the AI spin-off) has repeatedly insisted, it was never really about nothing. The events depicted were mundane, everyday stuff, but they were something.

By taking the premise literally, Nothing, Forever positions itself as the ultimate sitcom, more Seinfeld than Seinfeld itself. Pauses, already awkwardly long on sitcoms, especially when you factor in laugh tracks, become interminable. Laugh tracks, already used to cover for lackluster jokes here and there, get appended to sentences that simply don’t qualify as “jokes” under even the most charitable of interpretations. The characters never leave the apartment. There is no sustained plot. They have conversations, but they may as well be brains in vats. And in this way, they illustrate fairly well the current state of ChatGPT-like large language models. They can speak pretty convincingly, but they don’t have any foothold in the world itself. They’re all talk, no action.

At one point, as I was watching the other day, Fred got serious for a moment. “I’m thinking of trying something new,” he told Larry. “For real this time—no more just talking about it.” Now cue the laugh track.