McDonald's has been testing AI-powered ordering in its drive-thru lanes since 2019.

Some restaurants use voice bots to take orders.

TikTokers express frustration – and uncontrollable laughter – after failed run-ins with bots.

NEW LOOK Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Advertisement

Fast-food chains like McDonald's, Sonic, and Chipotle have been experimenting with AI-powered voice bots for taking phone and drive-thru orders for a few years.

But some McDonald's customers on TikTok are expressing frustration – and in some cases uncontrollable laughter – after run-ins with voice bots that can't get their orders correctly.

A viral post by @themaddivlog shows a young woman in an Adidas beanie struggling to order a cup of vanilla ice cream.

"I just want a large water and a cup of ice cream," the TikToker insists.

Advertisement

She grows exasperated when the order display menu shows she ordered two butters and four ketchup packets. The text overlay on the video states: "Fighting with McDonald's robot."

After multiple attempts to get her order straight, she ends the video:

"McDonald's, I'm done. We're done."

Another TikToker generated 97,000 views on a post, where she explained how "robots are taking over the world" and they're messing up her McDonald's order. She said the voice bot put 9 sweet teas on her order tab, when she only ordered one sweet tea.

Advertisement

Another frustrated drive-thru customer posted a TikTok video titled, "The McDonald's robot is wild."

Related stories

@typical_redhead_ could be heard laughing and snorting as she told the bot "stop" a few times. The digital menu board showed an excessive amount of McNugget meals ordered, totaling over $250.

TikToker @That_usa_guy_ was not as amused.

His video showed the bot replacing his order for a Mountain Dew with a medium Coke.

Advertisement

In the bot's defense, McDonald's restaurants don't serve Mountain Dew products. They serve Coca-Cola beverages.

When the TikToker tried to correct the beverage mistake, the voice bot appeared to ignore his request and went on to give him his check total.

"No, that's not correct," he told the bot.

He then canceled the meal and started over.

Advertisement

At that point, the bot handed the order to a "crew member" to complete the meal.

McDonald's has been testing AI-powered ordering in its drive-thru lanes since 2019. Some digital menu boards use artificial intelligence to upsell menu items based on trending food items or the weather. Those restaurants still have restaurant workers taking orders, but some McDonald's restaurants have voice bots. It's unclear how many.

McDonald's could not be reached for comment.

Despite the apparent kinks demonstrated by a few social media vloggers, restaurant chains are embracing automation and robots to help operations amid labor shortages. Checkers & Rally's, Taco Bell, Sonic, Panera Bread, and Popeyes are testing voice bots in drive-thru lanes. Chipotle uses bots to take phone orders, and is testing a robot fry cook in California.

Advertisement

Last year, McDonald's opened a new format restaurant in Texas that's nearly fully automated. It has an order-ahead lane for picking up digital orders from a food and beverage conveyor. Customers place orders on kiosks and pick them up on shelves.. Since 2021, McDonald’s has been experimenting with artificial intelligence-powered ordering systems in their drive-thrus.

It’s intended to work as follows: a customer approaches, places their order, and then the AI-powered machine confirms it before telling them to go to the next window, making alterations as needed.

How it has actually worked in practice is a bit different. Numerous users on TikTok have gone viral after showing their AI drive-thru fails. For example, in one case, the “intelligence” tried to add bacon to a customer’s ice cream.

Now, another user on TikTok has sparked discussion after claiming that a simple case of crosstalk from the neighboring drive-thru station caused the AI to add 9 sweet teas to her order.

The video, posted by user Ren (@resinsbiren), currently has over 93,000 views.

According to Ren, she had originally tried to order a hash brown, a sweet tea, and a Coke. However, as the robot was confirming her total, someone pulled up to the adjacent drive-thru line and placed their order, causing her machine to incorrectly add a Diet Coke.

Upon trying to remedy this mistake, the machine decided to add 8 additional sweet teas to Ren’s order. In response, Ren says she simply drove away.

McDonald’s itself has admitted that its AI system isn’t up to its own standards.

“McDonald’s drive-thru voice ordering accuracy rate at 24 Illinois restaurants was in the low 80% range, which is below the 95%-plus order accuracy rate the company wants before broader adoption, per a BTIG report,” writes author Alicia Kelso for Restaurant Dive.

That said, the company is not alone in shifting to AI to power its drive-thrus. Checkers, White Castle, Panera Bread, and other chains have also begun using computers to process customer orders automatically.

Back on TikTok, some commenters under Ren’s video claimed they’ve had similar experiences.

“This happened to me at Rally’s,” wrote a user. “I said mozzarella sticks and for some reason the robot also added fries and it wasn’t even shown on the screen.”

“My mom ordered 2 happy meals for my siblings,” recalled another. “It decided to try and give her 30, and she had to sit there and fight it.”

“…My total went from 3 something to 10 something be as I was driving to the window,” alleged a third. “It was adding the other person’s to mine.”

While some users recommended switching to the app, others yearned for the days when real people were on the other side of the microphone.

“And this is exactly why a person should take your order,” summarized a user.

The Daily Dot reached out to McDonald’s via email and Ren via TikTok comment.. photo by Mike Kemp/In Pictures via Getty Images

It's not been a wonderful few weeks for AI.

Both Google and Microsoft presented their new AI-powered chatterboxes and both seemed to make fundamental mistakes.

Yes, in the launch presentations.

Then Microsoft's Bing with ChatGPT took on less of a charming personality and more of a sociopathic affect.

Also: ChatGPT: What The New York Times and others are getting terribly wrong about it

Perhaps, then, AI needs a little more work.

Real humans knew this already. When they talk to Alexa or Siri, they may not have been understood. Or, indeed, as happens to me with Siri all the time, the AI completely misconstrues one's entire request.

Hey, Siri, play me some Van Der Graaf Generator.

OK, here's Are You Ready by D-Generation X.

When I first saw that McDonald's was embracing AI like a long-lost potential profit center, I wasn't entirely uplifted. The experience was devoid of, well, brand experience, instead being precisely the sort of dystopian that ruins one's digestive tract.

Also: Just how big is this new generative AI? Think internet-level disruption

It seems, though, that McDonald's has continued with the experiment, with occasionally pained results.

TikTok-er Ren Adams couldn't help but be moved by the robot's own moves at the McDonald's drive-thru. In a pulsatingly witty video, she explained that the robot's ears weren't as finely tuned as they might have been.

All Adams wanted for breakfast was hash browns, sweet tea and a Coke.

Of course you're tempted to criticize that order, but please don't. Whatever gets people moving in the morning isn't our concern today.

All seemed fine until, at a second drive-thru lane, another car pulled up. Adams' AI helper seems to have overheard that order and added it to Adams'.

Also: Generative AI could lower drug prices. Here's how

Adams tried to make the robot see sense. Or, rather hear it. Instead, the robot removed the errant Diet Coke and replaced it with, oh, nine sweet teas instead of one.

Which suggests something of a problem. When your robot drive-thru employee makes a mistake, to whom can you complain? Complaining to the robot seems to create an extra layer of complication and the potential for even greater misunderstanding.

Adams, indeed, isn't alone.

Here's Caitlyn Sykora (not) ordering $254 of McNuggets meals. And here's Madilynn Cameron wanting a large cup of water and a cup of ice cream and discovering butter is included. She seems to have given up.

Of course this is all amusing. And of course it might remind many of every single conversation they've had with a robot switchboard when they're desperate to talk to an actual human being.

You'll tell me robot ordering will get better. I'll be tempted to tell you: "How long have robot switchboards being annoying? Oh look, they still are."

This hasn't interrupted their march toward inevitability.

McDonald's itself admits the robot-only restaurant is but a CFO's dream.

Currently, it's far too expensive to implement and if you're not so good at fixing ice-cream machines, how good will you be at maintaining thousands of robot order-takers?. McDonald’s has a new AI ordering system and, well, some customers are not lovin’ it.

On Feb. 10, TikTok user Ren Adams (@resinsbiren) posted a video decrying McDonald’s new artificial intelligence technology, which the company has deployed at a number of drive-thrus around the country. And, as evidenced by many other TikToks, they're not alone in their complaints.

“So you all know how it’s 2023, and robots are taking over the world,” says Adams in the video.

Adams explains that that morning, they tried to order their “daily dose of caffeine” along with breakfast, wanting hash browns, a sweet tea and a Coke. But, when another passenger pulled up in the lane next to theirs to order, the AI picked up the other driver’s order, too.

“Mind you, at this McDonald’s, it’s all robot,” Adams says, explaining that the AI then adds the other customer’s Diet Coke to their order. “We’re talking to a robot, there’s no person on the speaker, it’s just a robot taking your order.”

After attempting to remove the errant soda from her order, the AI malfunctions, instead adding eight additional sweet teas to her order in addition to deleting the Diet Coke.

“I saw this s---, and I pulled out of the drive-thru and drove away. I said f--- that,” Adams says in frustration.

The partnership between tech juggernaut IBM and McDonald’s was first announced in a joint statement by both companies in October 2021. In the announcement, the companies said they would “further accelerate the development and deployment of its Automated Order Taking (AOT) technology,” which in the time since has come to pass.

Per the agreement, IBM acquired McD Tech Labs, a part of the fast-food conglomerate which was created to develop, test and deploy an AI-enabled voice system to automate McDonald’s drive-thru order-taking experience. McDonald’s has said the move is part of a broader effort to accelerate the ordering experience and fill gaps in its workforce, which includes testing the implementation of robot fryers.

The move followed McDonald’s 2019 acquisition of Apprente, a startup that built conversational agents to automate voice-based ordering, which can do so in multiple languages. McDonald’s calls this plan “Accelerating the Arches,” aiming for strides forward in its digital and delivery spaces in addition to the drive-thru.

“This agreement will accelerate McDonald’s efforts to provide an even more convenient and unique customer and crew experience,” reads the joint statement.

Still, according to a report emailed to Restaurant Dive in June 2022, McDonald’s AI has experienced lower accuracy rates than the 95% the company desired before rolling the tech out nationally. At 24 Illinois restaurants, the AI scored in “the low 80% range,” leaving quite a gap to automated grub-getting perfection.

A representative for McDonald’s did not immediately respond to TODAY.com’s request for comment on this story.

As McDonald’s continues to test this technology with real customers, even more complaints have emerged on social media.

On Jan. 24, TikTok user Cailyn Sykora (@typical_redhead_) posted a short clip of her and a passenger laughing hysterically at McDonald’s AI, as it adds order after order of chicken nuggets to her tab.

“This McDonald’s robot is wild,” reads the on-screen text, as the screen tallies a total of 28 orders of Chicken McNuggets for hundreds of dollars while the girls in the video beg it to stop through snorts of laughter.

An earlier video, from November 2022, shows user Madilynn Cameron (@themadivlog) “fighting” with the McDonald’s AI, trying to order vanilla ice cream without caramel when the machine adds cream to her order instead, then butter.

People on social media have been debating the merits of implementing AI technology in fast-food drive-thrus, with most commenters under these videos against the idea.

“I always ask for a human. I’m so glad they’re my only local place with the robot,” commented one TikTok user.

“Omg I would laughed so hard they need better robots this is (too) funny,” wrote another person.

“I wish they would get rid of the robots & make the order taker a WFH position where they can work drive thrus at multiple locations for (efficiency),” suggested another commenter.

“And this is exactly why a person should take your order,” commented another TikTok user. “We all know when we talk to computerized ppl even on the phone we gotta scream at our phone just for them to hear us correctly.”

Of course, McDonald’s isn’t the only fast-food chain to dive into the world of automated ordering: Companies like Panera, Wendy’s, Popeyes, Sonic and Checkers have all experimented with AI technology at the drive-thru in one form or another.