The claim: Video shows President Joe Biden making transphobic remarks in a speech

A Feb. 3 Instagram video shows President Joe Biden giving a speech with what appears to be audio of him insulting transgender women.

"You have no womb you have no ovaries," says the audio. "You have no eggs. You're a homosexual man twisted by drugs and surgery into a crude mockery of nature's perfection."

The video garnered more than 12,000 likes in five days. Similar posts have been shared on Instagram.

Follow us on Facebook! Like our page to get updates throughout the day on our latest debunks

Our rating: Altered

The audio track of the video has been altered. The original video shows Biden speaking about the U.S. and NATO supporting Ukraine during its war with Russia. He didn't discuss transgender issues during the speech.

Video's audio is altered

The clip was taken from a Jan. 25 speech that was shared on YouTube by various news outlets.

The flags in the background, Biden's hand gestures, the time stamp in the upper-left corner and the presence of Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defense Lloyd James Austin III match that of the cropped Facebook video.

Biden didn't discuss transgender women at any point during the speech. Instead, he spoke about the U.S. and NATO supporting Ukraine, according to a transcript published by the White House.

Fact check: Video altered to show White House Press Secretary Karine Jean-Pierre avoiding question

Biden has shown support for the transgender community throughout his presidential term. Examples of this support include his public criticism of anti-LGBT legislation across the country and his call on Congress to pass the Equality Act, which would give protections to individuals regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity.

This isn't the first time social media users have shared a video of a politician with edited audio. USA TODAY previously debunked claims that a video shows Former President Donald Trump defending Kanye West and that another shows a crowd chanting profanity at Biden during a speech on gun reform.

USA TODAY reached out to the user who shared the post for comment.

Lead Stories and PolitiFact also debunked this claim.

Our fact-check sources:

Thank you for supporting our journalism. You can subscribe to our print edition, ad-free app or electronic newspaper replica here.

Our fact-check work is supported in part by a grant from Facebook.. . This video has been shared by some accounts that openly acknowledge it to be a deepfake.

President Joe Biden on multiple occasions has offered public support for transgender Americans. He also overturned a ban on their military service, signed an executive order aimed at advancing equality for them, and nominated a transgender woman as assistant health secretary.

EDITOR’S NOTE: If you or someone you know may be considering suicide, dial 988 to contact the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline. For those deaf and hard of hearing, TTY users should use their preferred relay service or dial 711 then 988.

A deepfake video of President Joe Biden harshly criticizing transgender women is being shared on social media. While the voice on the video may sound like Biden, the words coming out of his mouth are contrary to his past public support of transgender Americans.

"You will never be a real woman," the fake Biden said in a video shared Feb. 5 on Instagram. The president then launches into a torrent of criticism aimed at transgender women, including a reference to suicide.

"I completely agree with my president on this. I stand with Biden," the poster wrote in a caption next to the video.

This post was flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed. (Read more about our partnership with Meta, which owns Facebook and Instagram.)

Two conservative websites wrote about the video and acknowledged it as a deepfake. They linked to a tweet from a pro-Donald Trump account that shared political memes and is now suspended.

We found no evidence of Biden making such remarks in a search of White House transcripts, but we did find plenty of evidence of the president’s efforts to support transgender people.

"My administration remains deeply committed to strengthening the rights of LGBTQI+ Americans, including transgender Americans," Biden said in a statement Nov. 20, 2022, on Transgender Day of Remembrance, a day started in 1999 to remember people killed by anti-transgender violence.

Also in the statement, Biden lists steps his administration has taken to support transgender people.

"Since taking office, we have made it possible for transgender service members to once again serve proudly and openly in our military, improved the travel experience for transgender Americans, and provided resources to support the mental health of transgender kids and their families," he said.

Biden made similarly supportive remarks on Transgender Day of Remembrance in 2021: "Transgender people are some of the bravest Americans I know. But no person should have to be brave just to live in safety and dignity."

Biden has supported transgender people since before he took office. As president-elect on Jan. 19, 2021, he chose Dr. Rachel Levine to be his assistant secretary of health. She was confirmed by the U.S. Senate in March 2021, becoming the first openly transgender person confirmed to an administration post by that body.

One of Biden’s first moves in office was signing an executive order Jan. 25, 2021, that overturned a Trump administration policy banning transgender people from serving in the military. The Department of Defense updated its policies after a review in March of that year.

On March 31, 2022, on Transgender Day of Visibility, Biden spoke glowingly about transgender Americans, and assured them that they have his support. He made similar remarks on that day in 2021.

"To transgender Americans of all ages, I want you to know that you are so brave," he said in 2022. "You belong. I have your back."

In June 2022, which is Pride Month, Biden signed another executive order aimed at protecting access to gender-affirming health care and responding to what he called an "unrelenting political and legislative attacks at the state level" against LGBTQI+ people.



Deepfake technology is becoming more common and experts fear videos employing these deceptive tactics may become harder to spot.

There is no evidence that Biden has criticized transgender Americans, as the video claims. He’s shown plenty of support, based on his remarks and actions since taking office in 2021. We rate the claim Pants on Fire!. 