Joe Rogan may have promoted questionable supplements, but he didn't actually endorse this one. It's a deepfake. Credit: Vivian Zink/Syfy/NBCU Photo Bank/NBCUniversal via Getty Images

If you've been on TikTok lately, you might have been served a video advertisement featuring Joe Rogan and one of his guests on his immensely popular podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience. In the clip, Rogan boasts about a "libido booster for men" supplement called Alpha Grind, going so far as to tell listeners exactly what to type in to find the product on Amazon.

Rogan is one of the most popular podcasters out there, with over ten million listeners per episode of his show. A brand endorsement like that would be a big get and likely a very expensive one for any product. Only Joe Rogan did not endorse Alpha Grind on his show. The clip featured in the TikTok video ad is a likely deepfake , an AI creation with the intent to make it appear as if Rogan endorsed the product in order to boost sales.

The video ad was posted and promoted on TikTok by a user going by the name @mikesmithtrainer. When Mashable first reviewed the TikTok account, the publicly posted videos consisted of testimonial clips of supposed everyday Alpha Grind consumers. As of publishing time, the @mikesmithtrainer account is no longer accessible on TikTok.

A TikTok spokesperson confirmed to Mashable that the company "removed these videos under our harmful misinformation policy." TikTok also banned the account.

On Twitter, user @JimmyFarley00 reposted the fake Joe Rogan clip and the tweet instantly went viral. The Twitter video has been viewed more than 5 million times and a number of users in the tweet's replies reportedly saw the ad on TikTok when it was still live. However, as of Feb. 15, the suspected Rogan deepfake has also been removed from Twitter. When trying to view the video, users are met with a prompt that claims the clip has been removed due to "a report from the copyright owner." Mashable has included an upload of the clip that is still live above.

When first confronted with the suspected deepfake Rogan video, some Twitter users didn't even realize what they were looking out for at first. Andrew D. Huberman, the guest on Rogan's podcast who is also featured in the video, entered the conversation to point out to those users that the conversation showcased in the video never actually happened.

"They created a false conversation," Huberman explained in the replies to the clip. "We were talking about something very different."

In the clip, it's clear that some parts of the conversation are lifted from the podcast. The video is heavily edited and takes bits and pieces from the actual episode. The clip then also weaves what is likely completely fabricated AI deepfake audio and footage of Rogan endorsing the Alpha Grind product during their conversation, which — pending analysis from an expert — would mean the hoaxer used machine learning to replicate Rogan's voice and paired that with deceptive video editing or additional AI fakery to match-up his facial features to what he's saying.

Deepfakes aren't new and have been worrying ethicists and disinformation experts for years now. However, there is a renewed interest in all things AI since OpenAI's impressive ChatGPT AI chatbot burst onto the scene showing just how much advancement has been made with machine learning technology.

TikTok actually banned deepfake videos on the platform back in 2020, however, it's unclear how much the policy is enforced. When Mashable reached out, a TikTok spokesperson highlighted the platforms Community Guidelines which disallow "Digital Forgeries (Synthetic Media or Manipulated Media) that mislead users by distorting the truth of events and cause significant harm to the subject of the video, other persons, or society."

It should be noted that not all deepfakes are used for nefarious purposes, and that the technology can be used for creative videos meant to simply entertain viewers. However, deepfakes have been consistently thrust into the spotlight for their more negative use cases. Just last month, a popular Twitch streamer went viral after he mistakenly revealed in a livestream that he purchased non-consensual deepfake porn of other Twitch streamers.

Mashable has reached out to TikTok for more information on the Joe Rogan TikTok ad and the removal of the account that posted it. We will update this piece when we hear back.. TikTok removed a suspected deepfake video in which podcaster Joe Rogan appears to promote a male-marketed coffee product called Alpha Grind on his show.

A spokesperson for the social media site told Fox News Digital in an email on Thursday that the video had been removed for "breaching [its] harmful misinformation policy, as per [its] Community Guidelines."

Harmful misinformation is defined as content that is inaccurate or false, and TikTok instructs users not to post, upload, stream or share digital forgeries, including synthetic media or manipulated media, that mislead users by "distorting the truth of events and cause significant harm to the subject of the video, other persons or society."

TikTok says it removes content that "causes significant harm to individuals, our community or the larger public regardless of intent." Significant harm does not include simply inaccurate information, myths or commercial or reputational harm.

TWO 15-YEAR-OLDS CHARGED WITH MURDER IN FATAL STABBING OF TIKTOK TEEN BRIANNA GHEY

TikTok told Mashable that the account that promoted the "libido booster" supplement was banned.

The video ad was posted and promoted on TikTok by a user called @mikesmithtrainer – an account that is no longer accessible on TikTok, according to the outlet.

Rogan and his guest, Stanford University associate professor Andrew D. Huberman, are seen in the video purportedly telling "The Joe Rogan Experience" listeners exactly what to search to find the product on Amazon. On Amazon, it says Alpha Grind, sold by the Delaware-based Top Shelf Grind Inc., is "viral on TikTok."

However, while bits and pieces are taken from the podcast, the video also weaves in fabrications.

"They created a false conversation," Huberman explained in the replies to the clip, which was reposted by a Twitter user. "We were talking about something very different."

JOE ROGAN RIPS ADAM SCHIFF, SECURITY AGENCIES FOR CENSORSHIP EFFORTS: 'BIZARRE'

The tweet went viral and was viewed millions of times before it was taken down.

"This media has been disabled in response to a report by the copyright owner," the post now reads. However, another upload of that clip remains live on Twitter.

Rogan has millions of subscribers and listeners and has recently tweeted about artificial intelligence.

Mashable notes that TikTok banned deepfake videos in 2020.

CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Fox News Digital's request for comment from Top Shelf Grind Inc. and Rogan was not immediately returned at the time of publication.. . An internet scam featuring an AI version of controversial podcaster Joe Rogan has gone viral, terrifying the internet with its implications for the future of AI.

AI has been taking over the internet recently, with chatbots like ChatGPT being widely discussed in the past few weeks. AI has started to spill more into the entertainment side of things too, with its recent invasion on Twitch in the form of nothingforever, a satirical parody of the 90’s show Seinfeld fully run by AI.

Alongside this, AI has improved dramatically in recent times, with AI versions of streamers gaining traction as more and more of Twitch slowly becomes interested. Asmongold was one of the first to receive the AI treatment, and his AI counterpart left him utterly dumbfounded.

Article continues after ad

Now, it appears that TikTok is also receiving AI treatment, as a Twitter post containing a TikTok scam went viral on February 12. The reason for its virality came through the method in which the ad used to convince viewers to buy the product, which was done through an AI version of controversial podcaster Joe Rogan.

Article continues after ad

The ad sees Rogan discussing with another individual about libido supplements for men, in particular, a brand named “Alpha Grind”. Rogan spouts about the utility of the product, stating that it’s listed as one of the highest products on Amazon, quite literally saying “If you go to Amazon and type in Libido Booster for Men, you’re going to find it right at the top. Because guys are figuring out that it literally is increasing size and making a difference down there.”

Article continues after ad

While the contents of the ad itself are rather hilarious, the fact is that Joe Rogan never spoke those words on his podcast. Instead, an AI-generated version of Joe Rogan’s voice was used for the advertisement, promoting the product for free without Rogan’s notice or consent. This has left the internet in a bit of a scared state.

Twitter users have expressed their concerns about how far AI has come, as well as the accuracy with which Rogan was being portrayed in the ad.

Article continues after ad

“We are all in trouble,” one user said. “That’s scarily real,” another added. “It’s definitely going to catch a lot of people.”

Article continues after ad

However, some have taken it the other way, with one user even going so far as to improve further upon the ad. They attempted to make Rogan’s voice more authentic, to which Twitch streamer Hasan was not impressed, scolding them, “bro stop.”

Time will only tell if AI continues to improve, but one thing for sure is that the internet is terrified of what may come in the future, considering the usage AI already has right now.. Humanity’s most sophisticated technology is being used to generate more Rogans

The thing about deepfake-impersonating a celebrity is that you can be almost anyone in the universe. You can be royalty! You can be a sex symbol! You can be a beloved dead actor brought back to life! So why do so many scammers, software developers, and Internet wise guys choose to be Joe Rogan?

AI startup Dessa started the ball rolling, developing software (in 2019!) that can make anyone look and sound like Rogan. Last year, another AI company released a podcast featuring a conversation between AI versions of Rogan and the previously dead Steve Jobs. Earlier this week, Cracked told you about comic Zach Silberberg using AI to fake ridiculous (and therefore eerily convincing) conversations between Rogan and Ben Shapiro. Canadians are dismayed about this phony dialogue between Rogan and Justin Trudeau.

This week, TikTok pulled down a fake video featuring “Rogan” shilling for Alpha Grind, a supposed libido booster for men. According to FakeRogan, it’s a supplement that can “really make a difference down there.” (The actual Alpha Grind product on Amazon is an instant coffee, albeit one with a Roganesque rundown of claimed health benefits.)

Advertisement

Advertisement

The implications of deepfake technology are alarming and potentially dangerous. But why is so much cutting-edge AI being devoted to impersonating the longtime host of Fear Factor? We have a few theories.

Theory 1: There’s so much Rogan to fake.

Rogan is a prime target for AI voice training, theorizes Ars Technica, because there is so much Rogan to choose from based on his hundreds of podcasts. AI needs material to sample, and few spew more words into the digital ether than the Here Comes the Boom costar. And the podcaster’s popularity likely plays into the equation--Rogan content has a way of going viral, even when it’s not really Rogan. "It's nice to sit back in the car and listen to you rant," says AI-generated Steve Jobs, proving that even dead geniuses are fans.

Theory 2: There is significant overlap in the Deepfake Scammer and Joe Rogan Listener populations.

Theory 3: Rogan has uploaded himself to Skynet.

Are we living in Terminator’s Skynet yet? If so, would anyone put it past the real Joe Rogan to hardwire his rants directly into the artificial general superintelligence system, if only as a means to promote Allform Customizable Sofas and MeUndies? We bow to our new digital overlords and thank them for the 20% off and free shipping when we use the code JOE.. It wouldn’t be completely out of character for Joe Rogan, the comedian turned podcaster, to endorse a “libido-boosting” coffee brand for men.

But when a video circulating on TikTok recently showed Mr. Rogan and his guest, Andrew Huberman, hawking the coffee, some eagle-eyed viewers were shocked — including Dr. Huberman.

“Yep that’s fake,” Dr. Huberman wrote on Twitter after seeing the ad, in which he appears to praise the coffee’s testosterone-boosting potential, even though he never did.