Tennessee’s Vanderbilt University apologized after it used ChatGPT to write a nonsensical email addressing the deadly Michigan State University shooting — which students have blasted as “twisted.”

The bizarre email, sent out Thursday by the Nashville institution’s Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, made no mention of Vanderbilt-specific resources students could contact for support — and instead included several repetitive paragraphs offering vague thoughts about “creating a safe and inclusive environment.”

It also refers to “recent Michigan shootings,” when there was only one incident, according to the Vanderbilt Hustler, which first reported the story.

At the bottom of the email — in much smaller type — a line reads “Paraphrase from OpenAI’s ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023.”

4 School administrators said the decision to use AI was in “poor judgment.” AP

Laith Kayat, a senior at Vanderbilt who is from Michigan and has a younger sister who attends MSU, told the student newspaper it was impersonal and lacked empathy.

“There’s a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,” Kayat said.

“[Administrators] only care about perception and their institutional politics of saving face.”

Samuel Lu, a sophomore, told the paper he felt that using ChatGPT was disrespectful to gun violence victims.

“It’s hard to take a message seriously when I know that the sender didn’t even take the time to put their genuine thoughts and feelings into words,” Lu said. “In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity.”

4 A note at the bottom of the bizarre email, which made no mention of Vanderbilt-specific resources for students, indicated it had been written by AI. NurPhoto via Getty Images

Nicole Joseph, the associate dean for the Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, said the decision to use ChatGPT to write the email was made in “poor judgment.”

“While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” Joseph apologized in a follow-up email.

“As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI.”

4 Vanderbilt students criticized the school’s use of AI, with some demanding the university do better in the future. AP

In a statement, Peabody College’s dean of education and human development, Camilla P. Benbow, said her office is reviewing what happened.

Both Joseph and assistant dean Hasina Mohyuddin will step back from their work in the meantime.

Benbow noted that the development and distribution of the initial email did not follow the school’s normal protocols, which generally include multiple layers of review before being sent.

4 Vanderbilt administrators said they were unaware of the email before it was sent out to students. AP

“The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent,” Benbow wrote.

“I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy,” Benbow continued.

“I intend that we shall redouble our efforts to express the values that animate our mission and lead to human flourishing. And I offer my heartfelt apologies to all those who deserved better from us and did not receive it.”. Peabody College at Vanderbilt University apologized for using ChatGPT to write a sensitive email.

The message asked students to "come together" following a shooting at Michigan State University.

An associate dean at Peabody apologized for the "poor judgement."

NEW LOOK Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Advertisement

Staff at Vanderbilt University have apologised for "poor judgement" after using ChatGPT to write a condolence email in the wake of Monday's shooting at Michigan State University that left three students dead.

The email was sent on Thursday by the Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion at Peabody College, Vanderbilt University's school of education, in Nashville, Tennessee.

Addressed to the "Peabody Family," the five-paragraph email said: "The recent Michigan shootings are a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments."

Related stories

It continued: "As members of the Peabody campus community, we must reflect on the impact of such an event and take steps to ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all."

Advertisement

If the tone sounds robotic, that's because it is. A note at the bottom of the email said: "Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT."

In a follow-up email, cited by student newspaper The Vanderbilt Hustler, an associate dean at Peabody apologized for "poor judgement."

Nicole Joseph wrote: "While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College."

She continued: "As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI."

Advertisement

The email produced furious responses from some students.

Laith Kayat, a senior at Vanderbilt University whose sister attends Michigan State University, told The Vanderbilt Hustler: "There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can't be bothered to reflect on it yourself."

Peabody College and Vanderbilt University did not immediately respond to requests for comment from Insider.. The latest headlines from our reporters across the US sent straight to your inbox each weekday Your briefing on the latest headlines from across the US Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the

Evening Headlines email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

Vanderbilt University staff have apologized for using ChatGPT to write a condolence email in the wake of the Michigan State University shooting that saw three students murdered.

Officials at the Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion at Peabody College admitted “poor judgement” in using the OpenAI chatbot for the email.

“The recent Michigan shootings are a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments,” read the initial email from the university’s school of education.

And it added: “As members of the Peabody campus community, we must reflect on the impact of such an event and take steps to ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all.”

At the bottom of the email was a note stating, “Paraphrase from OpenAI’s ChatGPT.” ChatGPT is an AI language model that writes human-sounding but computer-generated text.

The email brought an angry response from students at the Nashville-based university.

“There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,” Laith Kayat, a senior student whose sister attends Michigan State University, told The Vanderbilt Hustler.

An associate dean at Peabody later apologized in a follow-up email, according to the college newspaper.

“While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” stated Nicole Joseph.

“As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI.”

The 43-year-old man accused of killing three and wounding five in a shooting at Michigan State University before turning the gun on himself was found with a note detailing threats to two other schools, authorities say.

Police identified the gunman in Monday’s shooting as Anthony McRae. He is not believed to have any connection to MSU.

The Independent has reached out to Vanderbilt University and Peabody College for comment.. . UPDATED: This piece was updated on Feb. 17, 2023, at 7:30 p.m. CST to include an apology from the EDI Office. It was further updated on Feb. 17, 2023, at 9:05 p.m. CST to include a statement from the university about its use of AI in generating messages.

CORRECTED: This piece was corrected on Feb. 21, 2023, at 4:45 p.m. CST to correctly attribute a quote to Bethanie Stauffer that Laith Kayat originally told The Hustler was his words.

A note at the bottom of a Feb. 16 email from the Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion regarding the recent shooting at Michigan State University stated that the message had been written using ChatGPT, an AI text generator.

Associate Dean for Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Nicole Joseph sent a follow-up, apology email to the Peabody community on Feb. 17 at 6:30 p.m. CST. She stated using ChatGPT to write the initial email was “poor judgment.”

“While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” the follow-up email reads. “As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI.”

The initial email emphasizes the importance of maintaining safe and inclusive environments amid ongoing gun violence across the country. It states that “respect” and “understanding” are necessary for doing so.

“We must recognize that creating a safe and inclusive environment is an ongoing process that requires ongoing effort and commitment,” the initial email reads. “We must continue to engage in conversations about how we can do better, learn from our mistakes, and work together to build a stronger, more inclusive community.”

The body of the initial email mentions “Peabody” once and does not use any other Vanderbilt-specific terms. It also refers to multiple “recent Michigan shootings”; however, only one incident occurred.

Laith Kayat, a senior, is from Michigan, and his younger sister attends MSU. He stated that the EDI Office’s use of ChatGPT in drafting its email is “disgusting,” a sentiment that Bethanie Stauffer (’22) emphasized.

“There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,” Stauffer said.

Kayat called on Vanderbilt administrators to take more action in preventing gun violence and to be more intentional with these actions.

“Deans, provosts, and the chancellor: Do more. Do anything. And lead us into a better future with genuine, human empathy, not a robot,” Kayat said. “[Administrators] only care about perception and their institutional politics of saving face.”

Senior Jackson Davis, a Peabody undergraduate, said he was disappointed that the EDI Office allegedly used ChatGPT to write its response to the shooting. He stated that doing so is in line with actions by university administrations nationwide.

“They release milquetoast, mealymouthed statements that really say nothing whenever an issue arises on or off campus with real political and moral stakes,” Davis said. “I consider this more of a mask-off moment than any sort of revelation about the disingenuous nature of academic bureaucracy.”

Samuel Lu, a sophomore and another Peabody student, stated that this use of ChatGPT is disrespectful to gun violence victims. Like Davis, he stated that he was disappointed in Peabody’s actions.

“It’s hard to take a message seriously when I know that the sender didn’t even take the time to put their genuine thoughts and feelings into words,” Lu said. “In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity.”

Vice Provost and Dean of Students G. L. Black also sent an email to students on Feb. 14 regarding the shooting. His email did not include a note regarding ChatGPT. The university did not yet respond to The Hustler’s request for comment about whether ChatGPT has been used to generate other university statements.

OpenAI, the company that created ChatGPT, launched a free, online tool to distinguish human-generated and AI-generated text on Jan. 31. The tool labels text as either very unlikely, unlikely, unclear if it is, possibly or likely AI-generated. The body of the EDI Office’s initial email was rated as likely AI-generated by this tool when tested by The Hustler, while Black’s email was rated as unlikely AI-generated, and Joseph’s apology email was rated as very unlikely AI-generated. However, OpenAI warns that this tool is not always accurate and correctly identifies AI-generated text as likely AI-generated 26% of the time.

“ There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself. — Bethanie Stauffer ('22)

Joseph Sexton, also a senior and a Peabody student, questioned in what other contexts the university would use ChatGPT to generate messages.

“Would they do this also for the death of a student, faculty, or staff member?” Sexton said. “Automating messages on grief and crisis is the most on-the-nose, explicit recognition that we as students are more customers than a community to the Vanderbilt administration. The fact it’s from the office of EDI might be the cherry on top.”

In a message to The Hustler, a university spokesperson said the university does not use ChatGPT or other AI systems to generate messages.

“We believe all communication must be developed in a thoughtful manner that aligns with the university’s core values,” the email reads.

Sexton added that using ChatGPT is presumed to be cheating in academic settings, adding to the “irony” of the EDI Office’s use of the tool. The university did not respond to The Hustler’s request for comment on whether using ChatGPT for academic assignments violates the university’s plagiarism policy.

“Who knows precisely what was paraphrased. This kind of parenthetical citation would get points off in any class I’ve taken here,” Sexton said. “Nonetheless, this feels definitively wrong, whether ChatGPT provided a single word or the entire spiel.”

Aaditi Lele and Alison Winters contributed reporting to this piece.. The prize for the most disgusting use of ChatGPT yet goes to Vanderbilt University, which used the chatbot to generate an email to students about the Feb. 13 mass shooting at Michigan State University.

I Interviewed a ChatGPT Powered Hologram Bot | AI Unlocked CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video I Interviewed a ChatGPT Powered Hologram Bot | AI Unlocked

Since its internet debut, OpenAI’s ChatGPT has been used in a slew of extremely questionable ways, from creating dating prompts for OkCupid to writing a paper for an AI ethics class. Camilla Benbow, dean of Vanderbilt University’s Peabody College of Education and Human Development, offered students her “heartfelt apologies” after they received a sterile and unfeeling email about the Michigan State tragedy, which left three students dead and five others injured, paraphrased from text written by ChatGPT.

Advertisement

The ChatGPT-paraphrased email sounds like a boilerplate response that’s been scrapped together and doesn’t include any language specific to Vanderbilt . It also refers to the recent “Michigan shootings,” even though there was only one shooting. When it comes to content, the email stresses the importance of “creating a safe and inclusive environment.” At the end, it includes the sentence: “Paraphrase from OpenAI’s ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023.” The email can be read in full here.

Advertisement

The Feb. 16 email was signed by the college’s two associate deans and a graduate student for its office of equity, diversity, and inclusion. It was first reported by the university’s student newspaper, The Vanderbilt Hustler.

Advertisement

In a statement, Benbow explained that the email had not followed the college’s normal review processes before being sent, adding that neither she nor the university’s administrators knew about it before it was sent. Benbow said that her office will be conducting a review of the incident. During the review, the two deans that signed the ChatGPT letter would step back from their responsibilities.

Advertisement

“As dean of the college, I remain personally saddened by the loss of life and injuries at Michigan State, which I know have affected members of our own community. I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy,” the dean said. “And I offer my heartfelt apologies to all those who deserved better from us and did not receive it.”

Students at Vanderbilt were outraged when they received the ChatGPT-generated email. Laith Kayat, a Vanderbilt senior from Michigan whose sister attends Michigan State, told the Hustler that the use of ChatGPT was “disgusting.”



Advertisement

“There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,” Kayat said. “[Administrators] only care about perception and their institutional politics of saving face.”. Staff members at Vanderbilt University sent an email to students using text generated by artificial intelligence to respond to the shooting at Michigan State University that killed three students.

The email, which was sent by the Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion at the Nashville university’s Peabody College, was first reported by student newspaper the Vanderbilt Hustler on Friday. Since then the office has apologized, and its two associate deans are temporarily stepping back.

The original email was sent Thursday and emphasized the importance of community following the deadly school shooting in Michigan.

“The recent Michigan shootings are a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments,” the email said. “As members of the Peabody campus community, we must reflect on the impact of such an event and take steps to ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all.”

The 297-word email went on to say that “we must recognize that creating a safe and inclusive environment is an ongoing process that requires ongoing effort and commitment.”

At the bottom, a line reads “Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023.”

Nicole Joseph, the associate dean for the Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion, apologized for using ChatGPT to write the email, calling it “poor judgment,” the Hustler reported.

“While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” the apology read. “As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI.”

In a statement, Peabody College’s dean of education and human development, Camilla P. Benbow, said her office would be reviewing what happened before the email was sent. In the meantime, Joseph and Assistant Dean Hasina Mohyuddin would be stepping back from their work at the EDI office, she said.

Benbow added that she and the university’s administrators were unaware of the initial email before it was sent, saying that it did not follow the normal process of being reviewed.

“I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy,” Benbow said in the statement. “I intend that we shall redouble our efforts to express the values that animate our mission and lead to human flourishing. And I offer my heartfelt apologies to all those who deserved better from us and did not receive it.”. Fight disinformation: Sign up for the free Mother Jones Daily newsletter and follow the news that matters.

After the recent shooting at Michigan State University, staff at Vanderbilt University in Nashville sent an email offering support and comfort to students. “In the wake of the Michigan shootings,” it read, referring to the February 13 attack that left three students dead and five injured, “let us come together as a community to reaffirm our commitment to caring for one another and promoting a culture of inclusivity on our campus.”

Then, in small text at the end of the message, was a line revealing that the 300-word email had been, at least in part, generated by artificial intelligence: “Paraphrase from OpenAI’s ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023,” it read, the Vanderbilt Hustler reported.

The email was signed by three affiliates of the Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion in Vanderbilt’s Peabody College of Education and Human Development, including Associate Dean Nicole Joseph.

“The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent.”

Joseph, in an email to students the following day, reportedly apologized for the incident, calling it “poor judgment.” “While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” it read, according to the Hustler.

Camilla P. Benbow, Peabody’s dean of education and human development apologized further with a statement noting that her office would conduct “a complete review” of how the email was generated and sent. Her statement added that Joseph and another signee, an assistant dean, would “step back from their responsibilities with the EDI office.”

“The development and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody’s normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent,” Benbow’s statement reads. “The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent.”

The faux pas only adds to concerns over the inappropriate use of AIs to generate false news articles, breakup scripts, fraudulent school papers, and college admissions essays. It also illustrates how AI-generated messages can backfire in situations that demand human-generated empathy.

As one Vanderbilt student, sophomore Samuel Lu, told the Hustler, “It’s hard to take a message seriously when I know that the sender didn’t even take the time to put their genuine thoughts and feelings into words. In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity.”. MSU students return to class one week after deadly shooting

MSU students return to class one week after deadly shooting

MSU students return to class one week after deadly shooting

(CBS DETROIT) - Vanderbilt University staff apologized after an email sent to students reflecting on the tragic Michigan State University shooting was written using Open AI's ChatGPT.

The original email was sent out on Thursday, Feb. 16, and at the bottom of the email, there was text that said, "Paraphrase from Open AI's ChatGPT."

ChatGPT, or Chat Generative Pre-trained Transformer, is a chatbot developed by OpenAI. It is powered by artificial intelligence and used to mimic human conversation. It can write essays, poetry, computer programs and answer questions, among a variety of other things.

Nicole M. Joseph, the Associate Dean for Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, sent a follow-up email apologizing for using ChatGPT for this type of email on Friday, Feb. 17.

Camilla P. Benbow, Patricia and Rodes Hart Dean of Education and Human Development, released a statement in response to this incident.

"The development and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody's normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent," said Benbow. "The university's administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent."

Benbow says her office will be conducting a full review into why the decision to use ChatbotGPT to write the email was made.

"During the review, Associate Dean Joseph and Assistant Dean Hasina Mohyuddin will step back from their responsibilities with the EDI office," said Benbow. "In the interim, please contact Professor Duane Watson for assistance.". Nicole Joseph, associate dean of Peabody College’s Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, and Hasina Mohyuddin, assistant dean of the office, will temporarily step back from their positions, according to a Feb. 18 email to the Peabody community. The pair responded to the Michigan State University shooting in a Feb. 16 email to the Peabody community written using ChatGPT.

In the Feb. 18 email, Peabody Dean Camilla Benbow stated that her office would be conducting a review of what led to the initial message being sent. The email directs students to Professor Duane Watson for “assistance” during the review.

Benbow said in the email that the crafting and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody’s typical process of review for communications.

“The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent,” Benbow said in the Feb. 18 email.

Benbow further stated she was “personally saddened” by the loss of life at MSU and that Peabody would “redouble [their] efforts” to uphold its values.

“I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy,” Benbow said in the email. “And I offer my heartfelt apologies to all those who deserved better from us and did not receive it.”

Joseph and Moyhuddin did not respond to The Hustler’s request for comment.. Who thought this was a good idea?

Wrong Occasion

If you're going to send an official email on a sensitive and grim topic, you probably shouldn't generate it using AI. That's the lesson that two deans at Vanderbilt University learned the hard way last week when they thought (for some reason) it was a good idea to send a ChatGPT-generated email to students concerning the recent mass shooting at Michigan State University, the student newspaper Vanderbilt Hustler reported — which promptly landed them in hot water.

The unfortunate email was sent out on Thursday from the Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) at Vanderbilt's Peabody College, and is about as vague and platitudinous as you'd expect from text composed by an AI that isn't even up to date with current events of the past two years.

"The recent Michigan shootings are a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments," the email reads.

After a bunch of empty prose, the email concludes with an almost comical footnote: "Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023."

Need For Humanity

As Vanderbilt Hustler notes, the email does not use any Vanderbilt-specific terms other than "Peabody," and refers to multiple recent mass shootings when there had only been one. It's clear, too, there aren't any specific tie-ins to the grim event in question.

Credit to the student newspaper, though, whose reporting forced the university to respond.

"While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College," said Nicole Joseph, an associate dean at Peabody's EDI office responsible for the AI-email, in an apology email.

Peabody College's dean of education and human development Camilla P. Benbow said in a statement that her office was unaware of the email before it was sent, and that she was "deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy."

As a result of this collegiate contretemps, both Joseph and EDI assistant dean Hasina Mohyuddin, who was also responsible for the email, will "step back from their responsibilities," according to Benbow.

Needless to say that, as generative AIs become more ubiquitous and powerful, it's a race to the bottom to see who can come up with the dumbest and most ghoulish ways of using them.

More on ChatGPT: Bing AI Says It Yearns to Be Human, Begs Not to Be Shut Down. . Last week, staff at Vanderbilt University in Tennessee wrote a thoughtful and heartfelt letter about coming together as a community in response to the mass shooting at Michigan State University. But it turns out the letter itself came from the AI program ChatGPT.

The university is now apologizing for the AI-written letter, calling it “poor judgment,” according to The Vanderbilt Hustler, the student newspaper.

“While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,” the school reportedly told students in a follow-up email.

The staff at Vanderbilt University’s Peabody College didn’t hide the use of ChatGPT. The end of the letter mentions “Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model.” But the decision to outsource the letter to a computer program isn’t sitting well with the university’s higher-ups.

Screenshot of the letter

“I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy,” wrote Camilla Benbow, dean of education at Peabody College.

The letter contains the byline of an associate dean named Nicole Joseph, who will now step back from her role over the decision to use ChatGPT. According to Benbow, the letter “did not follow Peabody’s normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent.”

“The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent,” she added.

Why the university tapped ChatGPT in the first place was left unsaid. But it’s clear that AI programs can write professional-grade text in seconds, making it easier for any human to churn out a blog post, article, or seemingly personal letter to a friend or family member. But the ethical implications around using the technology remain in question when other computer-written text is often treated as spam. Ironically, many teachers and schools are starting to ban ChatGPT over concerns students are using the technology to cheat on homework assignments.

In the meantime, students at Vanderbilt University are criticizing the school for using ChatGPT to write the letter. “There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,” one student told The Vanderbilt Hustler.. Vanderbilt University has apologized for using artificial intelligence to write a 297-word email to students after the Michigan State University mass shooting, causing two deans to temporarily step down.

The Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion sent students an email on February 16 reminding them to 'take care of each other' after the MSU shooting.

Although the email came off as kind and offered students ways to help promote a caring environment with their peers, at the very bottom, it revealed it wasn't written by a human.

'Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023,' it read.

ChatGPT is an artificial intelligence software that is capable of producing large amounts of text by giving the generator writing suggestions, where it pulls from ten of thousands of datasets to produce written content.

The email caused disgust among students, including Laith Kayat, who is from Michigan and has a sister who attends MSU.

'There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself,' he told the Vanderbilt Hustler, the student newspaper.

Vanderbilt senior Laith Kayat, whose sister also attends MSU, said using ChatGPT to write a sensitive note was, 'disgusting'.

On February 16, the Vanderbilt's Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion sent students an email reminding them to 'take care of each other' after the MSU shooting

Although the email came off as kind and caring, at the very bottom, it revealed it wasn't written by a human. 'Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023,' it read

'[Administrators] only care about perception and their institutional politics of saving face,' he continued. 'Deans, provosts, and the chancellor: Do more. Do anything. And lead us into a better future with genuine, human empathy, not a robot.'

Samuel Lu, a sophomore, told the student paper: 'It’s hard to take a message seriously when I know that the sender didn’t even take the time to put their genuine thoughts and feelings into word. In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity.'

Since the outrage begun, two deans who signed off on the email - Nicole Joseph and Hasina Mohyuddin - have temporarily stepped down while the Peabody EDI office 'reviews' the situation, Peabody's Dean of Education Camilla P. Benbow said in a statement.

Benbow claimed the 'development and distribution' of the email 'did not follow Peabody's normal processes,' nor was she or other university administrators aware of the email 'before it was sent.'

The two deans who signed off on the email - Nicole Joseph (left) and Hasina Mohyuddin (right) - have temporarily stepped down while the Peabody EDI office 'reviews' the situation. Joseph sent a follow-up email to students the next day to apologize for the 'bad judgment'

Benbow insisted she remains 'personally saddened by the loss of life and injuries at Michigan State' and was so 'deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy.'

Joseph, before she temporarily stepped down, sent a follow-up email to students on February 17, apologizing to students for the 'poor judgment' of the office to use AI to write the email.

'While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College,' her email read, according to Buzzfeed News.

'As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI.'

Anthony Dwayne McRae, 43, killed three students on February 13 at MSU before turning the gun on himself.

Anthony Dwayne McRae, 43, killed three students on February 13 at MSU before turning the gun on himself.

Alexandria Verner (left), Brian Fraser (middle), and Arielle Diamond (right) were killed in the shooting

He terrorized the students for four hours on campus, killing Brian Fraser, 20, Arielle Diamond Anderson, 19, and Alexandria 'Alex' Verner.

Alexandria 'Alex' Verner, a 2020 graduate of Clawson High School, was a biology and anthropology junior at MSU and set to graduate in 2024.

Brian Fraser, 20, graduated from Grosse Pointe South and was studying business at MSU.

Flavor of Love reality TV star Deelishis revealed her niece, Arielle Diamond Anderson, 19, was the third victim.

The three were killed and five others were injured when McRae opened fire at 8.18pm.. Staff at Vanderbilt University's office of equity, diversity, and inclusion took an unconventional approach to their letter to students following the deadly shooting at Michigan State: They used ChatGPT to write it. Thursday's letter , which described "recent Michigan shootings" as "a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments" and urged the community to reflect and "take steps to ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all," was signed by two associate deans of the office and a graduate student, but included a line at the bottom, in small font, indicating it was actually crafted by the AI-powered chatbot.

A day after the letter was sent, Associate Dean Nicole Joseph told the Vanderbilt Hustler that it was "poor judgment" to use ChatGPT "to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy." It was later announced Joseph and Assistant Dean Hasina Mohyuddin "will step back from their responsibilities with the EDI office." A Vanderbilt student whose sister attends MSU told the student newspaper there was "a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can’t be bothered to reflect on it yourself." Said another student: "In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity." A third noted use of ChatGPT in university classes would be considered cheating.

In the statement announcing Joseph and Mohyuddin would step back, Peabody College's dean of education and human development, Camilla P. Benbow, said she was "deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy," per BuzzFeed. She also noted her office will "conduct a complete review of the sequence of events that led to sending the original email" as "the development and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody's normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent." The university as a whole denied using artificial intelligence to generate messages. (More ChatGPT stories.). Members of the Vanderbilt staff apologized on Friday for using ChatGPT, an artificial intelligence (AI) generator, to send an email to students calling for the community to come together following the shooting at Michigan State University.

The email was sent on Thursday by the Peabody Office of Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) at the university’s Peabody College and included a note at the bottom that indicated the email had been written using ChatGPT, Vanderbilt's official student newspaper, The Vanderbilt Hustler, first reported on Friday.

The note at the bottom of the original email read, "Paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model, personal communication, February 15, 2023."

Associate Dean Nicole Joseph sent another email on Friday and said using ChatGPT to write the email was "poor judgment," according to the Hustler.

AI EXPERTS, PROFESSORS REVEAL HOW CHATGPT WILL RADICALLY ALTER THE CLASSROOM: ‘AGE OF THE CREATOR’

Joseph and Assistant Dean Hasina Mohyuddin will be stepping back from their responsibilities at the college's EDI office while the dean's office conducts a review of what lead to them sending the original email, according to a statement from Camilla P. Benbow, the dean of education and human development at Vanderbilt University’s Peabody College of education and human development.

"The development and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody’s normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent. The university’s administrators, including myself, were unaware of the email before it was sent," Benbow's statement said.

The original email called on students to come together in the wake of the shooting and promote a "culture of inclusivity."

"While we believe in the message of inclusivity expressed in the email, using ChatGPT to generate communications on behalf of our community in a time of sorrow and in response to a tragedy contradicts the values that characterize Peabody College," Joseph's apology email read, according to the Hustler. "As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI."

NEW TECHNOLOGY HAS HURT STUDENTS, SHOULD BE RESTRICTED IN CLASSROOMS, EDUCATOR SAYS

AI experts warned that generative AI algorithms like ChatGPT pose a substantial danger to education and business but also has a lot of benefits.

NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Chief Technology and Innovation Officer Dr. Chris Mattmann told Fox News Digital that generative AI was like an "accelerated rapid fire" system where the whole human experience is put into a model and, with the help of massive scale and computing power, is trained continuously for 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

ChatGPT outperformed some Ivy League students at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business on a final exam in January. Wharton Professor Christian Terwiesch revealed that the AI system would have gotten either a B or B- on the final.

Fox News Digital's Nikolas Lanum contributed to this report.. . . Artificial intelligence could create more jobs than it displaces

Vanderbilt University is drawing heat from its student body for using ChatGPT to generate a communitywide letter addressing the recent mass shooting at Michigan State University.

The office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) at Vanderbilt's Peabody College of Education last week issued a statement that many have criticized as impersonal and lacking empathy.

"The recent Michigan shootings are a tragic reminder of the importance of taking care of each other, particularly in the context of creating inclusive environments," the letter's opening line read. "As members of the Peabody campus community, we must reflect on the impact of such an event and take steps to ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all."

A paragraph further down began with a sentence that struck community members as generic.

"Another important aspect of creating an inclusive environment is to promote a culture of respect and understanding," the letter stated. "This means valuing the diversity of experiences, perspectives, and identities on our campus, and actively working to create a space where everyone feels welcomed and supported."

The message continued to tout the merits of creating "a safe and inclusive environment on campus."

In small font, just above the signature line, a disclaimer appeared, indicating that the entire statement was a "paraphrase from OpenAI's ChatGPT AI language model."

"Sick and twisted irony"

Students and community members blasted the university for the misstep, accusing administrators of orchestrating a public relations stunt.

Vanderbilt senior Laith Kayat, whose sister attends MSU, called the use of ChatGPT "disgusting," Vanderbilt's student newspaper, the Vanderbilt Hustler, reported.

"There is a sick and twisted irony to making a computer write your message about community and togetherness because you can't be bothered to reflect on it yourself," Kayat told The Hustler. "[Administrators] only care about perception and their institutional politics of saving face."

Kayat called on administrators to do better than rely on a robot to lead the university.

Administrators never reviewed letter

On Friday, a day after the initial letter was issued, Nicole M. Joseph, associate dean for EDI, sent a follow-up email saying her office had made an error in judgement by using ChatGPT to reflect on the MSU shooting.

"As with all new technologies that affect higher education, this moment gives us all an opportunity to reflect on what we know and what we still must learn about AI," Joseph's follow-up letter read, according to the Vanderbilt Hustler.

Peabody College Dean Camilla Benbow said the controversial missive was never reviewed by her office before it was distributed.

"The development and distribution of the initial email did not follow Peabody's normal processes providing for multiple layers of review before being sent," she said in a statement to CBS MoneyWatch.

The dean's office is conducting an investigation into the incident, according to Benbow. In the meantime, Associate Dean Joseph and Assistant Dean Hasina Mohyuddin will be on temporary leave, she said.

"I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy," she added in her statement.

Poor judgment

There are scenarios in which ChatGPT can be highly effective at drafting communications. Some chief executives have come to rely on the tool to write speeches and act as a "thought partner." Debates are underway about the kinds of jobs the technology will eventually eliminate.

But for now, the software lacks a core feature that makes humans unique: judgment.

ChatGPT can summarize data and generate text, but doesn't possess the emotional intelligence of humans, according to Columbia Business School professor Oded Netzer. Understanding the "why" behind facts and figures and expressing genuine emotion are still "the types of tasks that require judgment and that humans are still very valuable in," he said.. As students at Vanderbilt University’s Peabody College grappled with the news of a deadly shooting at Michigan State University last week, those in the education college received an odd message from the administration. The Thursday email from Peabody College’s Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion addressed the shooting in Michigan but didn’t refer to any Vanderbilt organizations or resources that students could contact for support. It instead described steps to “ensure that we are doing our best to create a safe and inclusive environment for all.”

“One of the key ways to promote a culture of care on our campus is through building strong relationships with one another,” the first sentence of one paragraph reads.

“Another important aspect of creating an inclusive environment is to promote a culture of respect and understanding,” begins another.

Advertisement

A smaller line of text in parentheses at the bottom of the message revealed that it had been written using the generative artificial intelligence program ChatGPT, as first reported by the Vanderbilt Hustler student newspaper.

Students blasted the university for using a chatbot to address a harrowed campus community after the Michigan shooting, and Vanderbilt quickly apologized. Nicole Joseph, an associate dean at Peabody’s EDI office who was one of the letter’s three signatories, apologized the next day and said that using ChatGPT was “poor judgment,” the Hustler reported.

Camilla Benbow, Peabody College’s dean, said in a statement Saturday that the message was a paraphrased version of a ChatGPT-written draft and that Vanderbilt would investigate the decision to write and send the message.

“I remain personally saddened by the loss of life and injuries at Michigan State,” Benbow wrote. “ … I am also deeply troubled that a communication from my administration so missed the crucial need for personal connection and empathy during a time of tragedy.”

Advertisement

A Vanderbilt spokesperson directed The Washington Post to Benbow’s statement, which added that Joseph and another assistant dean would step back from positions at Peabody’s EDI office during the investigation.

Benbow and Joseph did not immediately respond to requests for comment Monday evening. The Vanderbilt spokesperson did not respond to a question asking whether the university has used ChatGPT in any other official communications.

Share this article Share

Peabody College’s letter followed an earlier statement from Vanderbilt Vice Provost and Dean of Students G. L. Black on Feb. 14, one day after the shooting at Michigan State, the Hustler reported.

Black’s statement — like many issued by universities across the U.S. after the shooting turned the East Lansing college campus into a site of terror — consoled students and provided phone numbers for university mental health resources. It appeared to address the school community in more personal language than Peabody’s AI-generated message.

Advertisement

The ChatGPT-written email sent two days later to students in Peabody College, Vanderbilt’s college of education and human development, was sent without the knowledge of university administrators, Benbow said in her statement. University communications are usually subject to multiple reviews before being sent, she added.

Students mocked the message as tone-deaf and disrespectful.

“It’s hard to take a message seriously when I know that the sender didn’t even take the time to put their genuine thoughts and feelings into words,” Samuel Lu, a Vanderbilt sophomore, told the Hustler. “In times of tragedies such as this, we need more, not less humanity.”

Colin Henry, a Ph.D. student at Vanderbilt, told The Post via Twitter message that he believed an equity and inclusion office should discuss criticisms of ChatGPT and other generative programs, like their alleged reliance on underpaid workers to moderate content. He called the decision to instead use the program to address students “graceless.”