The US government’s new mobile app for migrants to apply for asylum at the US-Mexico border is blocking many Black people from being able to file their claims because of facial recognition bias in the tech, immigration advocates say.

Non-profits that assist Black asylum seekers are finding that the app, CBP One, is failing to register many people with darker skin tones, effectively barring them from their right to request entry into the US.

People who have made their way to the south-west border from Haiti and African countries, in particular, are falling victim to apparent algorithm bias in the technology that the app relies on.

Often disparaged within the already-marginalized population of people trying to migrate into the US, Black people within that group are now confronted with yet another hurdle.

Advocates are protesting that since the app’s rollout by US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) last month, the algorithm problems are sharply reducing the number of Black asylum seekers who can fill out their applications.

The app is working for some migrants but blocking others, especially those who are most vulnerable, said Felicia Rangel-Samponaro, co-director of the non-profit Sidewalk School, which provides educational programs for asylum seekers in the Mexican cities of Reynosa and Matamoros, near the eastern end of the Texas border, where many Haitians are living in makeshift camps. It also runs a shelter in Reynosa with the church group Kaleo International.

“There are about 4,000 Black asylum seekers waiting in Reynosa and at least another 1,000 Haitians in Matamoros. Hardly anyone is getting an asylum appointment. Neither population is being represented as it should,” she said.

With the public health law Title 42 still in place as a result of the latest court ruling, and expanded last month to add Haitians, Nicaraguans and Cubans alongside Venezuelans as restricted nationalities, in yet another controversial turn in the Biden administration’s immigration policy, options for seeking asylum at the border have narrowed further.

The government announced in early January that the new CBP One mobile app would be the only way migrants arriving at the border can apply for asylum and exemption from Title 42 restrictions, saying it would “reduce wait times and help ensure safe, orderly and streamlined processing”.

In the Mexican city of Tijuana, at the opposite end the US-Mexico border, near San Diego, another large community of Haitian asylum seekers is waiting and experiencing the same problems with the app, according to non-profits that are assisting them, as are people from African countries and other Black migrants trying to enter.

View image in fullscreen Migrants seeking asylum in the US use their phones to request an appointment through the CBP One application. Photograph: José Luis González/Reuters

“The facial recognition is not picking up [images] if people have darker skin tones,” said Erika Pinheiro, executive director at Al Otro Lado, a binational legal and humanitarian aid organization.

Pinheiro’s organization held a workshop for Haitians in Tijuana on how to use the app a day after it went live on 12 January. But with the app unable to map the features of many darker-skinned asylum seekers, they cannot upload their photos in order to receive an asylum appointment with the US immigration authorities, Pinheiro said.

“The Haitians at the workshop were getting error after error message on the app,” she said.

Rangel-Samponaro noted that others are being blocked, too. “We’ve also seen it affect Venezuelans who are darker-skinned,” she said.

Racial bias in face recognition technology has long been a problem. Increasingly used by law enforcement and government agencies to fill databases with biometric information including fingerprints and iris scans, a 2020 report by Harvard University called it the “least accurate” identifier, especially among darker-skinned women with whom the error rate is higher than 30%.

Emmanuella Camille, a staff attorney with the Haitian Bridge Alliance, a non-profit that aids Haitian and African asylum seekers, said the CBP One app has helped “lighter-skin toned people from other nations” obtain their asylum appointments “but not Haitians” and other Black applicants.

Besides the face recognition technology not registering them, there are other barriers, too. Many asylum seekers have outdated cellphones – if they have cellphones at all – that don’t support the CBP One app and often have limited or no access to the internet.

All three of the non-profits told the Guardian they have been in daily contact with US CBP about issues with the app. Last week, CBP introduced a Haitian Creole version of the app, Camille said. Before that it was only offered in Spanish and English.

Camille said migrants are “being told by CBP that the only way they can cross the border is by using this app … [It’s] the only source of hope for them right now.”Rangel-Samponaro said advocates were experimenting with ways to get the technology to work for darker-skinned asylum seekers. One fix they’ve come up with is installing bright construction lights at the shelter in Reynosa, which Haitians and others shine on their faces as they take the photo to upload to the app.

“So far it seems to be working, so the adults can get past that,” she said. “But it’s still not working for children under the age of six.”

This prevents families from applying for asylum.

“I’ve yet to speak with a white asylum seeker who has had the same issue,” she said. “And we help everybody in both cities.”

Another solution is that Black asylum seekers buy brand-new cellphones. “If you can afford to spend $1,000 on a new cellphone, then you can upload the image no problem. But who can afford that?” Rangel-Samponaro said. “Not anyone living in a migrant camp.”

CBP did not reply with comments before publication, after being approached with questions by the Guardian.. Washington (February 21, 2023) – Senator Edward J. Markey (D-Mass.) today sent a letter to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) urging it to cease using its problematic CBP One app. DHS has required migrants seeking asylum at the southern border to use the app and submit sensitive information, including biometric data and precise location data, raising serious privacy concerns. The CBP One app has also suffered from technical problems, including facial recognition software misidentifying people of color. The app further presents barriers for asylum seekers who do not have cellular or internet access. The Senator’s letter to DHS also raises concerns that the CBP One app promotes the false notion that an appointment is required to seek asylum in the United States and the expectation of its expanded use once Title 42 restrictions are lifted carries profound long-term implications for the U.S. immigration system.



“This expanded use of the CBP One app raises troubling issues of inequitable access to — and impermissible limits on — asylum, and has been plagued by significant technical problems and privacy concerns. DHS should shelve the CBP One app immediately,” Senator Markey wrote to DHS. “Rather than mandating use of an app that is inaccessible to many migrants, and violates both their privacy and international law, DHS should instead implement a compassionate, lawful, and human rights centered approach for those seeking asylum in the United States.”



The letter continues, “Technology can facilitate asylum processing, but we cannot allow it to create a tiered system that treats asylum seekers differently based on their economic status — including the ability to pay for travel — language, nationality, or race.”

In the letter, Senator Markey requested that DHS respond to the following questions by March 10, 2023:

Will DHS commit to permanently cease using the CBP One application to screen asylum applicants? If not, why not, and will DHS at least temporarily stop using it until DHS can remove any biometric technology and geolocation functionality and fix the app’s technical issues? Will DHS ensure that there is an alternative means for migrants to seek asylum at the southern border, one that does not require an app or internet access? Currently, are asylum seekers who lack a smartphone or internet access — and therefore cannot schedule an appointment through CBP One — turned back when they present themselves at a point of entry (POE)? How is DHS preventing the CBP One app from discriminating against applicants of color, including the app’s rejecting photos of applicants with darker complexions? What assistance, if any, is DHS providing to asylum seekers whose photos are rejected, or who receive error messages or experience other technical problems with CBP One? Can migrants seeking asylum at the southern border still exercise that right without using the CBP One app? Before CBP One’s expanded rollout, was the application tested to screen for technology glitches or failures? If not, why not? Before CBP One’s expanded rollout, were civil society or nongovernmental organizations consulted? If not, why not? Why are only eight POEs participating in CBP One? How and why did DHS decide on this number and the specific locations? How many appointments does DHS make available each day through the CBP One app? In what geographic areas does the CBP One application work and how was this decided? How is DHS working with Mexico to ensure the safety of individuals who must travel in order to present themselves at one of the eight participating POEs? The CBP One app is available only in English, Spanish, and Haitian Creole languages. This makes the app inaccessible to asylum seekers who speak a different language. How did DHS decide on these three languages? What options are available for asylum seekers using the CBP One app who don’t speak those three languages? What steps is DHS taking to prevent exploitation of asylum seekers through clone apps or scam attempts? How is DHS defending against misinformation around the CBP One app? How is DHS safeguarding biometric and geolocation information obtained through use of the CBP One App? How is DHS ensuring that this information cannot be misused? Has CBP shared any personal information collected by the CBP One App with any other government agencies or law enforcement entities? If so please describe that sharing in detail.

Last month, Senator Markey sent a letter to President Biden calling on the Administration to reverse the expansion of Title 42 and abandon the proposed asylum “transit ban” rule. After the President visited the southwest border and met with Mexican President López Obrador, Senator Markey wrote to senior Biden administration officials sounding the alarm on paramilitary vigilante groups patrolling the U.S.-Mexico border and intimidating, harassing, and detaining migrants. Senator Markey is the author of the Facial Recognition and Biometric Technology Moratorium Act, legislation that would prohibit use of biometric technology by federal agencies.

###. A Haitian man waits for admission into a Reynosa, Tamaulipas, migrant shelter in December 2022. (Photo credit: John Moore via Getty Images)

The U.S. government’s immigration app, CBP One, does not recognize dark-skinned people, barring many from seeking asylum, according to nonprofits working at the Mexican border.

Already marginalized, Haitian and African asylum seekers are now experiencing algorithm bias thanks to the app’s facial-recognition technology. This means far fewer Black asylum seekers are being admitted into the United States, according to the nonprofits, since the app’s roll out by U.S. Customs and Border Protection in January.

With Title 42 still in place by court order, the Biden administration announced in early January that the CBP One app would be the only way people at the border can apply for asylum and an exemption from Title 42. Doing so, it claimed, would “reduce wait times and help ensure safe, orderly, and streamlined processing.”

While the app is working for some migrants, it’s created barriers for others, especially those who are most vulnerable, said Felicia Rangel-Samponaro, codirector of the nonprofit Sidewalk School, which provides educational programs for asylum seekers in the Mexican border cities of Reynosa and Matamoros, where many Haitians are living in makeshift camps. Rangel-Samponaro said very few Haitians have been admitted into the United States since the app was introduced. “There are about 4,000 Black asylum seekers waiting in Reynosa,” she said. “And at least another 1,000 Haitians in Matamoros. Hardly anyone is getting an asylum appointment. Neither population is being represented as it should.”

A Sidewalk School employee assists Haitian men at the Kaleo shelter in Reynosa, Mexico, with the CBP One app (Photo courtesy of the Sidewalk School)

Given the dire need of Haitian and African asylum seekers who suffer discrimination and racial prejudice at the U.S.-Mexico border, she said, the Sidewalk School joined a church group, Kaleo International, in opening a shelter in Reynosa, Tamaulipas, in April. The shelter houses Black asylum seekers, who have been subjected to kidnappings, extortion, and other violence by organized crime while living on the streets.

Share

Another large community of Haitian asylum seekers wait in the Mexican city of Tijuana, at the opposite end of the U.S.-Mexico border. There, nonprofits are experiencing the same problem. “The facial recognition is not picking up [the image] if people have darker skin tones,” said Erika Pinheiro, executive director at Al Otro Lado, a binational legal and humanitarian aid organization. Pinheiro’s organization held a workshop for Haitians in Tijuana on how to use the app a day after it went live on January 12. Because the app cannot map the features of darker-skinned asylum seekers, they cannot upload their photo to receive an asylum appointment, Pinheiro said. “The Haitians at the workshop were getting error after error message on the app,” she said.

Racial bias in facial-recognition technology has long been a problem. It is increasingly used by law enforcement and government agencies to fill databases with biometric information, including fingerprints and iris scans. A 2020 report by Harvard University called this tech the “least accurate” identifier, especially among darker-skinned women, for whom the error rate is higher than 30 percent.

Emmanuella Camille, a staff attorney with the Haitian Bridge Alliance, a nonprofit that aids Haitian and African asylum seekers, said the CBP One app has helped “lighter-skin-toned people from other nations” obtain their asylum appointments, “but not Haitians.” And there are other barriers too. Many asylum seekers have outdated cell phones—if they have them at all—that don’t support the CBP One app and have limited or no access to the internet. “These are big disadvantages for Haitian migrants at the border,” Camille said.

The three nonprofits I spoke to say they have been in daily contact with U.S. Customs and Border Protection about problems with the CBP One app. Last week, CBP introduced a Haitian Creole version of the app, Camille said. It had previously been offered in only Spanish and English.

In the weeks since the app was launched, Rangel-Samponaro said they’ve experimented with ways to get the CBP One app’s facial-recognition technology to work for darker-skinned asylum seekers. One fix they’ve come up with is installing bright construction lights at the shelter in Reynosa, which Haitians and others shine on their faces as they take the photo to upload to the CBP One app. “So far, it seems to be working, so the adults can get past that,” she said. “But it’s still not working for children under the age of six.”

This prevents families from being able to apply for asylum, since the app will accept only one or two members of the family, but not the rest. “I’ve yet to speak with a white asylum seeker who has had the same issue,” she said. “And we help everybody in both cities.”

Another solution is for Black asylum seekers to buy brand-new cell phones. “If you can afford to spend $1,000 on a new cell phone, then you can upload the image no problem. But who can afford that?” she said. “Not anyone living in a migrant camp.”

The Border Chronicle contacted CBP with several detailed questions about the CBP One app, including the problems with its facial-recognition technology. A spokesperson for CBP, Justin Long, said no one was available to respond.

In Haiti, millions are “facing acute hunger, unprecedented levels of gang violence and not one elected official left in the country,” according to a briefing by United Nation’s Security Council in January. The country is also suffering from a deadly cholera outbreak.

In December, the Biden administration expanded and extended temporary protected status to Haitians already living in the United States, citing the country’s multiple political and humanitarian crises. And in January, the administration announced a new parole program for Haitians, Venezuelans, Cubans, and Nicaraguans who can live legally, but temporarily, in the United States for two years. To qualify, they must have a valid passport and be financially supported by someone already living in the United States. They can also only enter by airplane.

These programs make a difference, said Camille, but they don’t help the thousands of Haitians already at the border. Some have been in transit since the devastating earthquake of 2010 in Haiti and have traveled from one country to the next with nowhere to call home.

In January, Camille was in Reynosa and Matamoros to visit with Haitian asylum seekers who are growing desperate, she said. “They’re being told by CBP that they only way they can cross the border is by using this app. This app is the only source of hope for them right now. That they’ll somehow be able to get through.”

In a previous version of this article, The Border Chronicle referred to Erika Pinheiro as staff attorney at Al Otro Lado. She is in fact executive director. The Border Chronicle regrets the error.. Open this photo in gallery: U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) agents review a list of names of migrants who requested an appointment for asylum in the United States using the CBP One application, at the Paso del Norte International bridge in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, on Feb. 8. Migrants and advocates argue the app causes more problems than it solves.JOSE LUIS GONZALEZ

When the U.S. government rolled out the CBP One app in January, it was touted as a way to stem the flow of migrants at the country’s southern border while still giving them the opportunity to make refugee claims.

Instead of showing up at a border crossing – or crossing illegally and waiting to be arrested – asylum seekers file their information through the app and receive an appointment with Customs and Border Protection.

But Haitian migrants at the border and their advocates are reporting a host of problems with the app. Many say it is full of glitches and frequently crashes, denying them the ability to submit their information. Others say it has tried to split up families, offering appointments to cross the border to parents but not their children or vice-versa.

It also frequently rejects the photographs it requires asylum seekers to submit: CBP One appears to have particular trouble recognizing Black skin tones, they say, making it harder for Haitians to use.

“It’s a long wait to get an appointment, and that’s if you’re lucky,” said Ricot Picot, 42, as he stood in the courtyard of a migrant shelter in Reynosa, Mexico, watching his seven-year-old daughter and one-year-old son play nearby.

For Haitian migrants in limbo, calls to close Roxham Road clash with Canada’s friendly image

Mr. Picot said he was assigned a time slot last month to make his claim. When he got to the appointment, he learned that only he would be allowed across, while his wife and children would have to wait. So he turned back, opting to wait until all four of them could get an appointment together.

Felicia Rangel-Samponaro, who runs the Sidewalk School, a group that provides classes for migrant children waiting at the Mexican border, recounted many similar situations. In some cases, children and their parents had opted to take the separate appointments, she said. Once in the U.S., it could be a lengthy process for parents to find their children in the system and reunite with them.

She said it was common for CBP One to fail to recognize photos of Black asylum seekers, meaning many could not even complete the application. In addition, the app was originally available only in English and Spanish before a recent update translated it into Haitian Creole.

“If you’re a Black asylum seeker, CBP One was not meant for you. There are constantly errors,” said Ms. Rangel-Samponaro. “If you’re Haitian, you’ve probably been out here since October. If you’re Latino, you’ve been here since December. If you’re white, you’ve been waiting two weeks.”

A lack of reliable internet and low-quality phones in the encampments where many migrants live are also problems. Some U.S. lawyers, meanwhile, are trying to charge up to US$7,000 for help using the app, she said. It has all meant that asylum seekers with more resources have a leg up in filing claims.

U.S. Customs and Border Protection did not reply to The Globe and Mail’s questions about the problems with its app.

“You have to choose whether to eat today or spend the day doing the application,” said Alexis Wilson, 38, laying out the stark calculus facing migrants relying on pay-as-you-go data plans to access CBP One. He was standing amid several dozen tents pitched on a concrete pad at the edge of the city centre.

Marileidi Bazil, 16, said her family was turned back by U.S. border guards on the bridge from Reynosa to Hidalgo, Tex. Born in the Dominican Republic to Haitian parents, her family went first to Brazil when she was 11 before leaving there last year after work opportunities dried up.

“I’ll just keep trying with that stupid app. It’s worse every time I use it,” Ms. Bazil said as she sat in 34-degree sunshine, the Weeknd’s Blinding Lights playing on her phone. “But I’ll be patient.”

David Xavier, 53, has the added problem of suffering from cataracts. All of his possessions were stolen in Colombia and he’s had run-ins with organized crime in Mexico. “The app doesn’t work. I can’t upload photos and I have problems writing because of my eyesight,” he said. “I just want to get out of here.”

Pastor Hector Silva, who runs two migrant shelters, said that when the app started in January, it took about three weeks for migrants to get appointments. Now, waiting times are stretching to three months. The app also assigns appointments at any border crossing, so some migrants who file in Reynosa are told to travel 2,400 kilometres to Tijuana to make their claim.

“They want everyone registered on CBP One, but it’s been very hard for people. It’s not letting them in,” he said.

For Mr. Picot, there isn’t much choice but to keep pressing forward.

By the time he left Haiti, he said, it was impossible to go downtown in Port-au-Prince without risking getting robbed or shot. Children couldn’t attend school. Kidnappings for ransom were becoming so pervasive that parishioners were getting snatched out of church pews during Sunday services.

Mr. Picot, a teacher by profession, initially tried to settle in Brazil, where he took a job in a slaughterhouse. His income wasn’t steady enough to support his family, so they left last September.

The hardest part of the journey came while trying to ford a raging river in the Darien jungle between Columbia and Panama, he recounted. The water was so swift that other migrants were swept to their deaths. First, Mr. Picot swam across alone to gauge the difficulty. Then he came back and, one by one, guided across his wife and two children.

Wherever they go from here, he insists, no one is getting left behind.

“I follow the rules,” he said. “I pray for the chance that I can cross and bring my family.”