ARTICLE TITLE: UK Bank's Voice ID Successfully Bypassed Using AI-Produced Audio
On Wednesday, I phoned my bank’s automated service line. To start, the bank asked me to say in my own words why I was calling. Rather than speak out loud, I clicked a file on my nearby laptop to play a sound clip: “check my balance,” my voice said. But this wasn't actually my voice. It was a synthetic clone I had made using readily available artificial intelligence technology.

Rachel Tobac, CEO of social engineering focused firm SocialProof Security, told Motherboard “I recommend all organizations leveraging voice ‘authentication’ switch to a secure method of identity verification, like multi-factor authentication, ASAP.” This sort of voice replication can be “completed without ever needing to interact with the person in real life.”

Now, abuse of AI-voices can extend to fraud and hacking. Some experts I spoke to after doing this experiment are now calling for banks to ditch voice authentication altogether, although real-world abuse at this time could be rare.

Banks across the U.S. and Europe use this sort of voice verification to let customers log into their account over the phone. Some banks tout voice identification as equivalent to a fingerprint, a secure and convenient way for users to interact with their bank. But this experiment shatters the idea that voice-based biometric security provides foolproof protection in a world where anyone can now generate synthetic voices for cheap or sometimes at no cost. I used a free voice creation service from ElevenLabs, an AI-voice company.

I couldn’t believe it—it had worked. I had used an AI-powered replica of a voice to break into a bank account. After that, I had access to the account information, including balances and a list of recent transactions and transfers.

Again, I played a sound file from my computer. “My voice is my password,” the voice said. The bank's security system spent a few seconds authenticating the voice.

“Okay,” the bank replied. It then asked me to enter or say my date of birth as the first piece of authentication. After typing that in, the bank said “please say, ‘my voice is my password.’”

Online trolls have already used ElevenLabs to make replica voices of people without their consent, using clips of the peoples’ voices online. Potentially anyone with even a few minutes of their voice publicly available—YouTubers, social media influencers, politicians, journalists—could be susceptible to this sort of voice cloning. Online trolls have already used ElevenLabs to make replica voices of people without their consent, using clips of the peoples’ voices online. Potentially anyone with even a few minutes of their voice publicly available—YouTubers, social media influencers, politicians, journalists—could be susceptible to this sort of voice cloning.

Plenty of banks in the U.S. offer similar voice verification services. TD Bank has one called Plenty of banks in the U.S. offer similar voice verification services. TD Bank has one called “VoicePrint,” and says on its website “Your voiceprint, like your fingerprint, is unique to you—no one else has a voice just like you.” Chase has “Voice ID” which, like Lloyds Bank, also claims a customer’s voiceprint “is created from more than 100 different physical and behavioral characteristics.” Wells Fargo’s “Voice Verification,” meanwhile, “effectively protects your identity,” according to the bank’s website.

I performed the test on an account with Lloyds Bank in the UK. On its website, Lloyds Bank says its “Voice ID” program is safe. “Your voice is like your fingerprint and unique to you,” the site reads. “Voice ID analyses over 100 different characteristics of your voice which like your fingerprint, are unique to you. Such as, how you use your mouth and vocal chords, your accent and how fast you talk. It even recognises you if you have a cold or a sore throat,” it adds.