CLAIM: Photos show former President Donald Trump being arrested by New York City law enforcement.



AP’S ASSESSMENT: False. The images are fabricated and Trump has not been arrested. The person who created many of the images circulating on social media confirmed they were produced using Midjourney, an artificial intelligence text-to-image generator, and first posted as parody.

THE FACTS: As New York prosecutors wrap up their probe into whether Trump engaged in an illegal hush money scheme involving a porn actress, social media users shared AI-generated images depicting his arrest.

“#BREAKING : Donald J. Trump has been arrested in #Manhattan this morning!” states a tweet that featured the images.

The fabricated images show what looks like New York Police Department officers restraining Trump as he resists, and one image even depicts Trump running away from the officers. A closer look at the images shows garbled text on the police officers’ uniform, along with distorted faces and hands. One image shows Trump wearing a police belt.

The false posts feature several images created by Eliot Higgins, founder and creative director of investigative collective Bellingcat. Higgins shared the images on Twitter but noted in a thread that they were generated using Midjourney, a tool that uses generative AI to create images from a simple text prompt.

For several of the images, Higgins said he submitted the text prompt, “Donald Trump falling over while getting arrested. Fibonacci Spiral. News footage,” to generate the images.

Some social media users then circulated the images on other platforms without that context.

Midjourney recently launched the more advanced model, which has the ability to produce more photorealistic images, compared to previous models.

“The Trump arrest image was really just casually showing both how good and bad Midjourney was at rendering real scenes, like the first image has Trump with three legs and a police belt,” Higgins said in an email to The Associated Press. “I had assumed that people would realise Donald Trump has two legs, not three, but that appears not to have stopped some people passing them off as genuine, which highlights that lack of critical thinking skills in our educational system.”

Another widely-circulating fabricated image — depicting five officers holding Trump by the arms — was not created by Higgins, but also shows hallmarks of some AI-generated images, including distorted hands.

The NYPD further confirmed no such arrest happened.

“Donald Trump has not been taken into custody by the New York City Police Department,” the agency wrote in an emailed statement Tuesday.

Trump over the weekend claimed without evidence that he would be arrested on Tuesday, but the former president has not yet been indicted.

A Manhattan grand jury has been probing Trump’s involvement in a $130,000 payment made in 2016 to the porn actress Stormy Daniels to keep her from going public about a sexual encounter she said she had with him years earlier. Trump has denied the encounter and any wrongdoing.

___

This is part of AP’s effort to address widely shared misinformation, including work with outside companies and organizations to add factual context to misleading content that is circulating online. Learn more about fact-checking at AP.. NEW YORK (AP) — Former President Donald Trump getting gang-tackled by riot-gear-clad New York City police officers. Russian President Vladimir Putin in prison grays behind the bars of a dimly lit concrete cell.

The highly detailed, sensational images have inundated Twitter and other platforms in recent days, amid news that Trump faces possible criminal charges and the International Criminal Court has issued an arrest warrant for Putin.

But neither visual is remotely real. The images — and scores of variations littering social media — were produced using increasingly sophisticated and widely accessible image generators powered by artificial intelligence.

Misinformation experts warn the images are harbingers of a new reality: waves of fake photos and videos flooding social media after major news events and further muddying fact and fiction at crucial times for society.

“It does add noise during crisis events. It also increases the cynicism level,” said Jevin West, a professor at the University of Washington in Seattle who focuses on the spread of misinformation. “You start to lose trust in the system and the information that you are getting.”

While the ability to manipulate photos and create fake images isn’t new, AI image generator tools by Midjourney, DALL-E and others are easier to use. They can quickly generate realistic images — complete with detailed backgrounds — on a mass scale with little more than a simple text prompt from users.

Some of the recent images have been driven by this month’s release of a new version of Midjourney’s text-to-image synthesis model, which can, among other things, now produce convincing images mimicking the style of news agency photos.

90b8f06293bc4cc7b090aec3b8c81a83

In one widely-circulating Twitter thread, Eliot Higgins, founder of Bellingcat, a Netherlands-based investigative journalism collective, used the latest version of the tool to conjure up scores of dramatic images of Trump’s fictional arrest.

The visuals, which have been shared and liked tens of thousands of times, showed a crowd of uniformed officers grabbing the Republican billionaire and violently pulling him down onto the pavement.

Higgins, who was also behind a set of images of Putin being arrested, put on trial and then imprisoned, says he posted the images with no ill intent. He even stated clearly in his Twitter thread that the images were AI-generated.

Still, the images were enough to get him locked out of the Midjourney server, according to Higgins. The San Francisco-based independent research lab didn’t respond to emails seeking comment.

“The Trump arrest image was really just casually showing both how good and bad Midjourney was at rendering real scenes,” Higgins wrote in an email. “The images started to form a sort of narrative as I plugged in prompts to Midjourney, so I strung them along into a narrative, and decided to finish off the story.”

He pointed out the images are far from perfect: in some, Trump is seen, oddly, wearing a police utility belt. In others, faces and hands are clearly distorted.

But it’s not enough that users like Higgins clearly state in their posts that the images are AI-generated and solely for entertainment, says Shirin Anlen, media technologist at Witness, a New York-based human rights organization that focuses on visual evidence.

Too often, the visuals are quickly reshared by others without that crucial context, she said. Indeed, an Instagram post sharing some of Higgins’ images of Trump as if they were genuine garnered more than 79,000 likes.

“You’re just seeing an image, and once you see something, you cannot unsee it,” Anlen said.

In another recent example, social media users shared a synthetic image supposedly capturing Putin kneeling and kissing the hand of Chinese leader Xi Jinping. The image, which circulated as the Russian president welcomed Xi to the Kremlin this week, quickly became a crude meme.

It’s not clear who created the image or what tool they used, but some clues gave the forgery away. The heads and shoes of the two leaders were slightly distorted, for example, and the room’s interior didn’t match the room where the actual meeting took place.

With synthetic images becoming increasingly difficult to discern from the real thing, the best way to combat visual misinformation is better public awareness and education, experts say.

“It’s just becoming so easy and it’s so cheap to make these images that we should do whatever we can to make the public aware of how good this technology has gotten,” West said.

Higgins suggests social media companies could focus on developing technology to detect AI-generated images and integrate that into their platforms.

Twitter has a policy banning “synthetic, manipulated, or out-of-context media” with the potential to deceive or harm. Annotations from Community Notes, Twitter’s crowd-sourced fact checking project, were attached to some tweets to include the context that the Trump images were AI-generated.

When reached for comment Thursday, the company emailed back only an automated response.

Meta, the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, declined to comment. Some of the fabricated Trump images were labeled as either “false” or “missing context” through its third-party fact-checking program, of which the AP is a participant.

Arthur Holland Michel, a fellow at the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs in New York who is focused on emerging technologies, said he worries the world isn’t ready for the impending deluge.

He wonders how deepfakes involving ordinary people — harmful fake pictures of an ex-partner or a colleague, for example — will be regulated.

“From a policy perspective, I’m not sure we’re prepared to deal with this scale of disinformation at every level of society,” Michel wrote in an email. “My sense is that it’s going to take an as-yet-unimagined technical breakthrough to definitively put a stop to this.”

___

Associated Press reporter David Klepper in Washington contributed to this story.. Sign up for the daily Inside Washington email for exclusive US coverage and analysis sent to your inbox Get our free Inside Washington email Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the

Inside Washington email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

AI-generated deepfakes showing Donald Trump making a run from authorities and being arrested have flooded Twitter ahead of the former president’s possible indictment.

Mr Trump could be indicted by a Manhattan grand jury as soon as next week and potentially charged with falsifying business records connected to hush money payments during his 2016 campaign to adult film actor Stormy Daniels.

An indictment in New York would make Mr Trump the first former president to face a criminal charge.

The fabricated images, now viewed over 4 million times, show Mr Trump resisting as officers resembling those from the New York Police Department attempt to restrain him.

Some images fabricated scenarios where the 45th president is seen struggling to run away from the officers.

There has been a surge in online threats directed at government and political officials ahead of the rumoured indictment, with plans for what one commenter called “January 6 times ten”.

“Making pictures of Trump getting arrested while waiting for Trump's arrest,” wrote Eliot Higgins, founder of investigative collective Bellingcat, while sharing a series of deepfake images.

He said the images were created using artificial intelligence text-to-image generator Midjourney.

Mr Higgings said that, for several images, he submitted the text prompt, “Donald Trump falling over while getting arrested. Fibonacci Spiral. News footage”.

The fake images show garbled text on the police officers’ uniforms, along with distorted faces and hands. One image shows Mr Trump wearing a police belt.

The deepfakes include Melania Trump, along with the former president’s son, Donald Trump Jr protesting the arrest.

Another widely circulating fabricated image – depicting five officers holding Mr Trump by his arms – was not created by Mr Higgins, but shows hallmarks of some AI-generated images.

“The Trump arrest image was really just casually showing both how good and bad Midjourney was at rendering real scenes, like the first image has Trump with three legs and a police belt,” Mr Higgins told the Associated Press.

“I had assumed that people would realise Donald Trump has two legs, not three, but that appears not to have stopped some people passing them off as genuine, which highlights that lack of critical thinking skills in our educational system.”

Another fake image, an AI-generated mugshot of Mr Trump shared by Twitter user called O’Keefe Reborn, has also been making rounds on the social media platform.

Some of the images were share widely by Twitter users, who falsely claimed them to be real pictures.

Meanwhile, the New York Police Department has confirmed there has been no such arrest.

“Donald Trump has not been taken into custody by the New York City Police Department,” the agency said in a statement on Tuesday.. Newswatchers don’t have to wait for real images of Donald Trump in handcuffs—deepfakes are already flooding social media thanks to artificial intelligence technology that lets any hoaxer pose as a breaking news photographer.

Trump announced on Saturday morning that he expects to be arrested on Tuesday on charges related to a hush money payment to adult film star Stormy Daniels. It’s unclear whether Trump will be indicted, much less led to jail in cuffs. But AI programs like Midjourney have made it easy for Trump’s fans and foes alike to generate lifelike pictures of his perp walk.

“Unfortunately, these tools for creating realistic images are very useful for hoaxing the public,” Joan Donovan, a Harvard University researcher and author of the book Meme Wars told The Daily Beast. “We are witnessing a new form of ‘anticipatory disinformation,’ where rumors are made into reality through the creation of media covering events that never happened.”

“BREAKING,” one Twitter user wrote hours after Trump’s Saturday announcement. “FBI raids Mar A Lago to make Trump arrest. Exclusive photos.”

The pictures he uploaded were cinematic. Agents storming Trump’s Florida resort in riot gear, running beneath gold chandeliers with rifles drawn. Only some of the officers looked unusual on second glance. One had a curiously pixelated face, another with stumpy fingers like dog paws. The images were generated by AI, by a Twitter user who’s also shared computer-generated images of Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez cosplaying and President Joe Biden participating in an occult ritual with goat horns.

He also shared one of several fake images of agents pulling Trump toward a waiting police van. Those images, and similar AI variations by other provocateurs, quickly spread from Twitter to sites like 4chan and YouTube, where “breaking news” channels used the picture as the thumbnail image on their videos. (“Where was Trump arrested?” one YouTube commenter complained. “Clickbait.”)

“ Very soon, images like this will be ALL over Social Media... and they will be MUCH better. ”

Some AI artists admitted that their pictures were dupes—eventually. “Holy shit they actually did it,” wrote one user who shared his own picture of a Trump perp walk, before sharing increasingly implausible AI images of Trump meditating in jail, wielding a sword, and standing atop the Capitol with a dragon.

“If this fooled you, you’re not ready for the Future,” he wrote of the first image. “Very soon, images like this will be ALL over Social Media... and they will be MUCH better.”

AI art and text generators have soared in popularity in recent months, with programs like Midjourney allowing users to create realistic images based on text prompts like “Trump getting arrested by the FBI.” And while those programs are far from perfect (many still struggle to draw human hands that don’t look like a Lovecraftian nightmare), they’re getting better. Last week, Midjourney unveiled its latest version, which can render surprisingly lifelike images, including of normal-looking hands.

Two days before Trump’s announcement, journalist Eliot Higgins tested the new Midjourney update by asking the program to generate pictures of politicians in dramatic scenarios: Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin holding Ukrainian peace talks, Putin in a prison jumpsuit, and Trump getting arrested. Higgins even made the Trump dupes look as if they were screenshots of a news broadcast by adding “news footage” to the Midjourney prompt.

Although Trump has not been arrested or charged, the fake images have proved popular on the right and left, with Trump opponents cheering the idea of the ex-president in prison, and Trump supporters rallying around their not-actually-arrested leader.

Other computer-generated fakes have previously put words in politicians’ mouths. A viral deepfake video of Biden purported to show the president announcing a draft of Americans to fight in Ukraine. No such draft exists.. Twitter has been flooded with images depicting the arrest of Donald Trump, mugshots taken by the New York police and the anguish of his wife, Melania — all of which have yet to happen.

Generated by artificial intelligence, the fabricated, or deepfake, pictures show the former president fighting with and fleeing from officers. Another shows his wife, Melania, and his son Donald Trump Jr shouting in protest against his arrest.

On Saturday Trump, 76, said on social media that he expected to be arrested on Tuesday this week over hush money paid to the former porn star Stormy Daniels, 44, before the 2016 presidential election. She claims she was paid to stay silent over a brief affair she had had with him.

ELIOT HIGGINS/BELLINGCAT

ELIOT HIGGINS/BELLINGCAT

An indictment. Twitter was flooded Wednesday with AI-generated deepfake photos of former President Donald Trump resisting arrest and trying to run from police ahead of his potential New York indictment this week.

The fabricated images — which had been viewed more than 4 million times — appear to show Trump yelling and fighting off at least five NYPD officers.

In others, he’s depicted breaking free from cops and bolting as Melania Trump and Donald Trump Jr. shout in protest of his arrest.

Many of the disturbingly realistic-looking images were shared widely by Twitter users, who falsely claimed they were legitimate.

The fakes come as a Manhattan grand jury is weighing whether to indict Trump in connection to hush money paid to porn star Stormy Daniels in 2016.

Eliot Higgins, founder of the investigative group Bellingcat, tweeted out the deepfakes and said they were created with the artificial intelligence text-to-image generator Midjourney.

“Making pictures of Trump getting arrested while waiting for Trump’s arrest,” he tweeted.

4 A deepfake image shows Trump crying in court. Twitter / Eliot Higgins

4 The deepfakes also show Melania Trump protesting the arrest. Twitter / Eliot Higgins

The images were made using the prompt “Donald Trump falling over while getting arrested. Fibonacci Spiral. News footage,” he said.

“The Trump arrest image was really just casually showing both how good and bad Midjourney was at rendering real scenes, like the first image has Trump with three legs and a police belt,” Higgins said later, adding he didn’t think observers would take the shots seriously.

“I had assumed that people would realize Donald Trump has two legs, not three, but that appears not to have stopped some people passing them off as genuine, which highlights that lack of critical thinking skills in our educational system.”

4 An AI-generated deepfake shows Donald Trump making a run from authorities and being arrested. Twitter / Eliot Higgins

4 The fake images also show the former president lifting weights behind bars. Twitter / Eliot Higgins

Another deepfake created by a Twitter user known as O’Keefe Reborn also claims to show a mugshot of Trump while others show him behind bars in an orange jumpsuit.

Trump has not been arrested.

The Manhattan grand jury didn’t reconvene Wednesday as scheduled due to a witness who was not available to appear, sources told The Post.

If Trump is indicted, it would make him the first former president ever to be charged with a crime.. The viral, AI-generated images of Donald Trump’s arrest you may be seeing on social media are definitely fake. But some of these photorealistic creations are pretty convincing. Others look more like stills from a video game or a lucid dream. A Twitter thread by Eliot Higgins, a founder of Bellingcat, that shows Trump getting swarmed by synthetic cops, running around on the lam, and picking out a prison jumpsuit was viewed over 3 million times on the social media platform.

What does Higgins think viewers can do to tell the difference between fake, AI images, like the ones in his post, from real photographs that may come out of the former president’s potential arrest?

“Having created a lot of images for the thread, it's apparent that it often focuses on the first object described—in this case, the various Trump family members—with everything around it often having more flaws,” Higgins said over email. Look outside of the image’s focal point. Does the rest of the image appear to be an afterthought?

Even though the newest versions of AI-image tools, like Midjourney (version 5 of which was used for the aforementioned thread) and Stable Diffusion, are making considerable progress, mistakes in the smaller details remain a common sign of fake images. As AI art grows in popularity, many artists point out that the algorithms still struggle to replicate the human body in a consistent, natural manner.

Looking at the AI images of Trump from the Twitter thread, the face looks fairly convincing in many of the posts, as do the hands, but his body proportions may look contorted or melted into a nearby police officer. Even though it’s obvious now, it’s possible that the algorithm might be able to avoid peculiar-looking body parts with more training and refinement.

Need another tell? Look for odd writing on the walls, clothing, or other visible items. Higgins points toward messy text as a way to differentiate fake images from real photos. For example, the police wear badges, hats, and other documents that appear to have lettering, at first glance, in the fake images of officers arresting Trump. Upon closer inspection, the words are nonsensical.

An additional way you can sometimes tell an image is generated by AI is by noticing over-the-top facial expressions. “I've also noticed that if you ask for expressions, Midjourney tends to render them in an exaggerated way, with skin creases from things like smiling being very pronounced,” Higgins said. The pained expression on Melania Trump’s face looks more like a re-creation of Edvard Munch’s The Scream or a still from some unreleased A24 horror movie than a snapshot from a human photographer.. NewsOne Featured Video CLOSE

UPDATED: 9:55 a.m. ET, March 31

Originally published on March 22

These internet streets were very hungry to see Donald Trump arrested and jailed ahead of the criminal indictment returned by a grand jury on Thursday that stems from hush money allegedly paid to a porn star as he ran for president back in 2016.

Last week, content creators fed hat craving by serving up deepfake photos created by artificial intelligence that show depictions of the former president being angrily hauled away by would-be NYPD officers, looking dejected in court and sitting in a jail cell draped in an orange jumpsuit typically seen on prisoners.

Some of the fake images show Trump running from police officers, something cynical critics on social media suggested the former president couldn’t do in real life because he isn’t physically fit enough.

In case you’re unfamiliar with the term “deepfake,” the Associated Press defines it as “a manipulated video or other digital representation produced by sophisticated machine-learning techniques that yield seemingly realistic, but fabricated, images and sounds.”

But upon close inspection, there’s usually a tell-tale sign that they’re not real.

In this case, we know they’re not real because Trump has not been arrested as of Friday morning.

The photos began populating social media timelines last Wednesday and likely will not match what happens to Trump if and when he is arrested, according to one former prosecutor who doubts the former president will be paraded in front of the media like many other accused criminals.

Any expectations of enjoying the optics of seeing Trump being handcuffed, pushed into a squad car and driven downtown for booking are probably delusions of grandeur, according to one former prosecutor.

The process of a traditional arrest will take place, former U.S. Army prosecutor Glenn Kirschner told USA Today, but it will not happen traditionally, so to speak.

That means that it’s highly doubtful that there will be a “perp walk” of Trump walking in handcuffs so that the media can photograph and video the so-called money shot of an accused criminal being publicly shamed, Kirschner said.

“There will be no reason to cuff him and walk him into police headquarters to be booked,” Kirschner told USA Today.

However, the world will get to see a photo of Trump being booked that will live in infamy no matter how the case turns out.

“There will still be a mug shot, fingerprints and lots of paperwork filled out as part of the booking process,” Kirschner continued. “So we will see a mug shot of a former President of the United States but I do not think we’re going to see a perp walk.”

With that said, the photos aren’t a stretch by any means of the imagination, what with Trump’s persistent denials of any legal culpability for any of the allegations he’s facing from multiple district attorneys investigating him.

In fact, Trump a couple of weekends ago urged his followers to “protest” and “take our nation back” is he is arrested, using language that nearly mirrors that of his speech in the hours before conservatives violently and illegally broke into the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, and disrupted the U.S. Senate certifying the election of Joe Biden at the behest of the former president.

In the meantime, until that mug shot is made public, the likely only satisfying optics for people who oppose Trump can be found below in the form of computer-generated images of his arrest and jailing. Scroll down for a sampling of the social media brilliance that is deepfake photos of Trump being arrested, arraigned and jailed.. . Eliot Higgins, the founder of the open-source investigative outlet Bellingcat, was reading this week about the expected indictment of Donald Trump when he decided he wanted to visualize it. He turned to an AI art generator, giving the technology simple prompts, such as, “Donald Trump falling down while being arrested.” He shared the results — images of the former president surrounded by officers, their badges blurry and indistinct — on Twitter. “Making pictures of Trump getting arrested while waiting for Trump’s arrest,” he wrote.

“I was just mucking about,” Higgins said in an interview. “I thought maybe five people would retweet it.”

Two days later, his posts depicting an event that never happened have been viewed nearly 5 million times, creating a case study in the increasing sophistication of AI-generated images, the ease with which they can be deployed and their potential to create confusion in volatile news environments. The episode also makes evident the absence of corporate standards or government regulation addressing the use of AI to create and spread falsehoods.

Advertisement

“Policymakers have been warning for years about the potential misuse of synthetic media to spread disinformation and more generally to sow confusion and discord,” said Sen. Mark R. Warner (D-Va.), the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. “While it took a few years for the capabilities to catch up, we’re now at a point where these tools are widely available and incredibly capable.”

Warner said developers “should already be on notice: if your product directly enables harms that are reasonably foreseeable, you can be held potentially liable.” But he said policymakers also have work to do, calling for new obligations to ensure firms are addressing the dangers of artificial intelligence.

The leading online platforms where such images are disseminated have inconsistent policies on the matter. Twitter did not respond with comment to a Washington Post inquiry about the images. A Meta spokeswoman pointed to examples of the images — which quickly leaped off Twitter to other platforms — being fact-checked on its services, including on the photo-sharing app Instagram. YouTube and TikTok did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Advertisement

“Missing Context. Independent fact-checkers say information in this post could mislead people,” reads the red text below one of the images in a post shared by an account with more than 3,000 followers.

On Facebook, however, one of the images was left untouched when shared by a user with three times as many followers. “In an unprecedented turn of events, former President Donald Trump was arrested and escorted to federal prison,” wrote the user, who describes himself as a blogger and former U.S. infantryman. “The shocking image of Trump, with officers holding both of his hands, quickly circulated on social media.”

There was a penalty for Higgins, but it was exacted by Midjourney, the art generator he had used to create the visuals. And it arrived without explanation. He said he was locked out of Midjourney’s server on Wednesday but received no communication from the company about what rules he had violated.

Advertisement

Midjourney, which describes itself as an “independent research lab exploring new mediums of thought and expanding the imaginative powers of the human species,” did not respond to a request for comment.

“I thought, ‘Oops, looks like there’s been a consequence for my actions,’” Higgins said.

Trump over the weekend wrote on Truth Social, his social networking site, that he expected to be arrested on Tuesday, priming his supporters for images of his apprehension.

“It’s the first visual collateral of Trump getting arrested, even if he’s not,” said Angelo Carusone, the president of Media Matters for America, the left-leaning watchdog group. “This is going to be the image that a lot of people have in their minds even if Trump doesn’t end up getting indicted — let alone arrested.”

When Higgins began circulating the Trump images, he made clear that they were fakes. But the cascade of visuals he was able to seed across the internet shows “there’s been a giant step forward in the ability to create fake but believable images at volume,” said Sam Gregory, executive director of the human rights organization Witness. “And it’s easy to see how this could be done in a coordinated way with an intent to deceive.”

Advertisement

Defects of the technology that raise doubts about the authenticity of the images — six-fingered hands or metallic skin — don’t undercut its disruptive potential, said Gregory, whose group convened experts last fall from across the technology industry, law, art and entertainment to identify ways to “support the nascent power of synthetic media for advocacy, parody and satire, while confronting the gray areas of deception, gaslighting and disinformation.” Among the potential actions they identified were disclosure and labeling of how media is made.

“The aim,” Gregory said, “may not be to convince people that a certain event happened but to convince people that they can’t trust anything and to undermine trust in all images.”

The technology is advancing fast. Higgins said he used Version 5 of Midjourney’s art generator to create the Trump images. The latest version, for which he pays $30 per month, is much more sophisticated than its immediate precursor, he said, vastly improving a set of visuals he created of U.S. presidents as popes. “The tool seems to be learning more about image coherence,” he said.

Advertisement

The technology appears to build iteratively on its knowledge of certain visuals, Higgins said. “I’m pretty sure it’s about the number of people it’s been trained on with a given name,” he explained. “For celebrities, the less famous they are internationally, the less accurate the images.”

Once his images of Trump’s fictitious arrest began taking off, he decided to complete the story arc — adding images of a trial and an ultimate escape from prison. Certain cues tripped up the technology. “I did one of Donald Trump carving a key out of soap, but it generated an orange Donald Trump out of soap, which is interesting but not what I was going for,” Higgins said.

Complex themes also present problems for the technology, he said. Given fears that such tools may be used by conspiracy theorists, Higgins has sought to simulate their efforts. But his attempts have mostly fallen flat. His instructions to create an image of two bugbears of the political right laughing together — Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s former leading infectious-disease doctor, and George Soros, the liberal financier — led to an image of the two men merged together, Higgins said.

Advertisement

Synthetic media has been used in recent weeks to push falsehoods online, sometimes with unclear provenance and other times with the material’s creator gloating about it.

Last month, a faked video spread on Twitter appearing to show Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) claiming that Republicans should not be allowed to vote. Twitter labeled it “altered audio,” and one of the main accounts circulating the falsified material was later suspended.

When far-right activist Jack Posobiec tweeted a video seeming to show President Biden announcing a military draft to answer Russia’s offensive in Ukraine, he described it as a “sneak preview of things to come.” Twitter applied a label to the tweet stating, “The video shown is a ‘deepfake’ created with the aid of artificial intelligence (AI).”

Posobiec, in an appearance this month at the Conservative Political Action Conference, defended the tactic. “So this week, I made a deepfake of Joe Biden that got a little bit of attention,” he said. The move met pushback not just from fact-checkers, he said, but also from some on the right who asked him, he said, “How can you do that? Why would you make something like this?”

Advertisement

“Screw them all,” he said of fact-checkers and mainstream news outlets.

Major technology companies bolstered their policies against deepfakes after the rapid spread on social media of a distorted video of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) in 2019. The following year, Meta banned users from posting highly manipulated videos but left the door open for manipulated videos that are meant to be parody or satire. Twitter also introduced a new rule prohibiting users from sharing deceptive and manipulated media that may cause harm, such as tweets that could lead to violence, widespread civil unrest or threatening someone’s privacy.

“Since then, the technology has gotten more sophisticated but a lot harder to detect,” Carusone said. “And none of them have made any significant investments in how they are not only going to detect these issues but then enforce their policies against it.”

Advertisement

He added: “What I see here is kind of the opening salvo in a new front in the war against disinformation.”

Jessica González, co-CEO of the media advocacy group Free Press, said the tech giants are less equipped to combat deepfakes following widespread layoffs in the industry. Meta, Google and Twitter have collectively laid off tens of thousands of workers in recent months.

Since taking over Twitter in October, Elon Musk has softened the platform’s policies against hate speech, reinstated extremist influencers and scaled back the company’s content moderation practices through drastic cuts in its workforce.