Ironically, the Pope commented on ethical AI usage this weekend, too.

Drip God

Did they fool you? Those mega-viral images of Pope Francis looking fresh to death in a pristine white puffer are AI-generated fakes.

As Snopes reports, that pic of Il Papa that went viral over the weekend is, as lots of people suspected, a fake — and, as always, the debunking site has the receipts to prove it.

Though it is quite a good fake, the first time the image was posted online appears to have been on the r/Midjourney subreddit on Friday, March 24 under the befitting headline, "The Pope Drip."

The boys in Brooklyn could only hope for this level of drip pic.twitter.com/MiqkcLQ8Bd — Nikita S (@singareddynm) March 25, 2023

Midjourney is, as many armchair AI heads will know, a powerful AI generator that can spit out photorealistic images of, among tons of other things, real people that are almost good enough to be believed.

Indeed, Midjourney was the program behind AI-concocted images of Donald Trump getting arrested by the NYPD, which went moderately viral amongst both his fans and his foes — though most seemed in on the joke.

TrAInspotting

Not so with the dripped-out Pope. Though there were minute tells that folks on the lookout can use to detect AI fakes — a digital paintbrush-is-ness visible on the faces, the backgrounds are fuzzy, and the hands still don't look perfect — many were taken in by the Swag Pope.

As with the fake Trump arrest photos, the virality of these AI-generated images is concerning — especially considering how quickly these neural networks are improving.

Ironically enough, the real Pope spoke about ethical uses of AI soon after the fake drip images went viral, though it doesn't appear that he commented specifically about the phony images of him circulating online.

For now, eagle-eyed netizens are still able to detect real and what's generated by AI — but who knows how long that will last?

More on AI: FTC Warns That Scammers Are Cloning Your Relatives' Voice To Steal Your Money. After a realistic AI-generated image of Pope Francis in a puffy coat went viral on social media last year, the Pope himself apparently took notice, reports Reuters. In a message for the 58th World Day of Social Communications, Francis writes, "We need but think of the long-standing problem of disinformation in the form of fake news, which today can employ 'deepfakes,' namely the creation and diffusion of images that appear perfectly plausible but false (I too have been an object of this)."

The Pope also warns about audio messages that "use a person’s voice to say things which that person never said," he continues. "The technology of simulation behind these programs can be useful in certain specific fields, but it becomes perverse when it distorts our relationship with others and with reality."

In March 2023, a Twitter user named "skyferrori" used the Midjourney v5 image synthesis service to create a convincing fake photo of Pope Francis wearing a long white puffer coat and posted it on the service. It quickly went viral and today stands at over 197,000 likes and 28.1 million views. Many people thought it was a real photo, and it was notable at the time for being one of the first AI-generated images that fooled a large audience online.

Advertisement

"I was having this discussion with a friend, and I'll be honest, I didn't think it was fake," wrote a commenter named "thrillgore" on the Ars Technica forums at the time. "I thought it was genuine even though earlier in the day I had read that Pope Francis is a frugal fella, and doesn't flaunt the wealth of the Vatican... It was funny yesterday, now it's absolutely horrifying."

Since the launch of Stable Diffusion in 2022, we've frequently covered deepfakes and worries about them undermining social trust, lowering the quality of information online by injecting noise, fueling online harassment, and possibly disrupting the historical record. It's an unsolved problem, with watermarking technology often deemed unreliable and metadata-tagging projects not yet widely supported. Fundamentally, our ability to trust what we see online will come down to how much we trust the messenger.

"The development of systems of artificial intelligence, to which I devoted my recent Message for the World Day of Peace, is radically affecting the world of information and communication and through it, certain foundations of life in society," the Pope warns. "These changes affect everyone, not merely professionals in those fields. The rapid spread of astonishing innovations, whose workings and potential are beyond the ability of most of us to understand and appreciate, has proven both exciting and disorienting.". . . It was a cold wind that blew through St. Peter's Square at the Vatican over the weekend, but that didn't deter Pope Francis from taking a stroll outside to greet the faithful, as he often does. When images appeared online showing the 86-year-old pontiff atypically wrapped up against the elements in a stylish white puffer jacket and silver bejewelled crucifix, they soon went viral, racking up millions of views on social media platforms.

The picture, first published Friday on Reddit along with several others, was in fact a fake. It was an artificial intelligence rendering generated using the AI software Midjourney.

Fake photos generated by artificial intelligence software appear to show Pope Francis walking outside the Vatican in a designer coat, which he never did.

While there are some inconsistencies in the final rendered images — for example, the pope's left hand where it is holding a water bottle looks distorted and his skin has an overly sharp appearance — many people online were fooled into thinking they were real pictures.

The revelation that they had been dupped left some Twitter users shocked and confused.

"I thought the pope's puffer jacket was real and didn't give it a second thought," tweeted model and author Chrissy Teigen. "No way am I surviving the future of technology."

The "pope in the puffer jacket" was just the latest in a series of "deepfake" images created with AI software. Another recent example was pictures of former President Donald Trump that appeared to show him in police custody. Although the creator made it clear that they were produced as an exercise in the use of AI, the images, combined with rumors of Trump's imminent arrest, went viral and created and entirely fraudulent but potentially dangerous narrative.

Midjourney, DALL E2, OpenAI and Dream Studio are among the software options available to anyone wishing to produce photo-realistic images using nothing more than text prompts — no specialist training required.

As this type of software becomes more widespread, AI developers are working on better ways to inform viewers of the authenticity, or otherwise, of images.

CBS News' "Sunday Morning" reported earlier this year that Microsoft's chief scientific officer Eric Horvitz, the co-creator of the spam email filter, was among those trying to crack the conundrum, predicting that if technology isn't developed to enable people to easily detect fakes within a decade or so "most of what people will be seeing, or quite a lot of it, will be synthetic. We won't be able to tell the difference."

In the meantime, Henry Ajder, who presents a BBC radio series entitled, "The Future Will be Synthesised," cautioned in a newspaper interview that it was "already very, very hard to determine whether" some of the images being created were real.

"It gives us a sense of how bad actors, agents spreading disinformation, could weaponize these tools," Ajder told the British newspaper, I.

There's clear evidence of this happening already.

Last March, video emerged appearing to show Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy telling his troops to lay down their arms and surrender. It was bad quality and quickly outed as a fake, but it may have been merely an opening salvo in a new information war.

So, while a picture may speak a thousand words, it may be worth asking who's actually doing the talking.