The Italian privacy regulator Friday ordered a ban on ChatGPT over alleged privacy violations.

The national data protection authority said it will immediately block and investigate OpenAI, the U.S. company behind the popular artificial intelligence tool, from processing the data of Italian users. The order is temporary until the company respects the EU's landmark privacy law, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).

Calls to suspend new ChatGPT releases and investigate its maker OpenAI over a range of risks regarding privacy, cybersecurity and disinformation are growing on both sides of the Atlantic. Elon Musk and dozens of AI experts this week called for a pause to updates of ChatGPT. Consumer advocacy group BEUC also called on March 30 for EU and national authorities including data protection watchdogs to investigate ChatGPT. 

The authority said the company lacks a legal basis justifying "the mass collection and storage of personal data ... to 'train' the algorithms" of ChatGPT. The company also processes data inaccurately, it added.

ChatGPT also suffered a data breach and exposed users conversations and payment information of its users last week, the Italian authority said. It added OpenAI does not verify the age of users and exposes "minors to absolutely unsuitable answers compared to the their degree of development and self-awareness."

OpenAI doesn't have an office in the EU, but its representative in the European Economic Area has 20 days to communicate how it plans on bringing ChatGPT into compliance with EU privacy rules or face a penalty of up to 4 percent of its global revenue.

OpenAI disabled access to ChatGPT in Italy following the Italian regulator's order, but a spokesperson said the company disagreed with the findings. "We believe we comply with GDPR and other privacy laws," said the spokesperson in a written response to POLITICO.

The CEO of the company, Sam Altman, said on Twitter that OpenAI was deferring to "the Italian government" on the issue. "Italy is one of my favorite countries and I look forward to visiting again soon," he added.

This story has been updated with comment from OpenAI.. . . Effective: January 31, 2024

We’ve updated our Privacy Policy below. These updates do not apply to individuals located in the European Economic Area, UK, and Switzerland. If you reside in those areas, this version of our Privacy Policy applies to you.

We at OpenAI OpCo, LLC (together with our affiliates, “OpenAI”, “we”, “our” or “us”) respect your privacy and are strongly committed to keeping secure any information we obtain from you or about you. This Privacy Policy describes our practices with respect to Personal Information we collect from or about you when you use our website, applications, and services (collectively, “Services”). This Privacy Policy does not apply to content that we process on behalf of customers of our business offerings, such as our API. Our use of that data is governed by our customer agreements covering access to and use of those offerings.

For information about how we collect and use training information to develop our language models that power ChatGPT and other Services, and your choices with respect to that information, please see this help center article.

April 28 (Reuters) - The ChatGPT chatbot was reactivated in Italy after its maker OpenAI addressed issues raised by Italy's data protection authority, the agency and the company confirmed on Friday.
Microsoft Corp (MSFT.O), opens new tab-backed OpenAI took ChatGPT offline in Italy last month after the country's data protection authority, also known as Garante, temporarily banned the chatbot and launched a probe over the artificial intelligence application's suspected breach of privacy rules.

Garante had given a deadline till Sunday to OpenAI to address its concerns for allowing the chatbot to start operating again in the country.
Last month, Garante said ChatGPT has an "absence of any legal basis that justifies the massive collection and storage of personal data" to "train" the chatbot.
Garante had also accused OpenAI of failing to check the age of ChatGPT's users who are supposed to be aged 13 or above, OpenAI said it will offer a tool to verify users' ages in Italy upon sign-up.
Garante said it recognises the steps taken to combine technological progress with respect to people's rights and hopes that the company will continue along this path of compliance with European data protection regulations.
Italy was the first western European country to curb ChatGPT, but its rapid development has attracted attention from lawmakers and regulators in several countries.
A committee of European Union lawmakers on Thursday agreed on new rules that would force companies deploying generative AI tools, such as ChatGPT, to disclose any copyrighted material used to develop their systems.