Texas A&M University–Commerce said it is investigating after a screenshot of an instructor's email — in which he accused students of having used artificial intelligence on their final assignments — went viral on Reddit.

Jared Mumm, an instructor in the agricultural sciences and natural resources department, reportedly told students that they would be receiving an “X” in the course after he used "Chat GTP" (referring to the AI chatbot actually known as ChatGPT) to determine whether they’d used the software to write their final assignments. He said that he tested each paper twice and that the bot claimed to have written every single final assignment.

“I copy and paste your responses in [ChatGPT] and [it] will tell me if the program generated the content,” according to the email, a copy of which NBC News has reviewed. Rolling Stone first reported the story.

Attempts to reach Mumm by email, LinkedIn and phone were unsuccessful Wednesday. A university spokesperson confirmed Mumm sent the email.

The Rayburn Student Center at Texas A&M University-Commerce. Google maps

The screenshot was shared Monday in the subreddit r/ChatGPT, a community made up of 1.6 million users. Many blasted him, and others came to his defense, noting that AI is still a very new tool. The discussion reignited debate around the impact chatbots could have on education.

After its viral launch in December, ChatGPT was lauded online by some as a dramatic step forward for artificial intelligence and the potential future of web search. But with such praise also came concern about its potential use in academic settings. In January, the New York City Education Department announced a ban on ChatGPT from its schools’ devices and networks, citing the potential for increased student cheating.

A university spokesperson rebutted parts of the Reddit post, which claimed “Texas A&M commerce professor fails entire class of seniors blocking them from graduating- claiming they all use ‘Chat GTP’”

No students flunked or were prevented from graduating because of the issue, the spokesperson said.

"Dr. Jared Mumm, the class professor, is working individually with students regarding their last written assignments," the university said in its statement. "Some students received a temporary grade of ‘X’—which indicates ‘incomplete’—to allow the professor and students time to determine whether AI was used to write their assignments and, if so, at what level."

The spokesperson said that since the email was posted on Reddit, "several students have been exonerated and their grades have been issued, while one student has come forward admitting his use of Chat GTP in the course. Several other students have opted to complete a new writing assignment made available to them by Dr. Mumm."

The Reddit post was shared by a user named DearKick, who claimed to have obtained the email from their fiancé, a student in the class.

Hundreds of people responded in the comments.

A user suggested that there "be an AI introductory class that is mandatory for teachers and everyone else to understand the biases of AI and how it functions." Another took the criticism a step further and suggested the instructor should face disciplinary action from the university.

“I know several university lecturers that are actively embracing the reality of ChatGPT and other AI and are looking at how to increase the learning potential that can be gained while finding better ways of analysing students skills and capabilities,” wrote another user. “This all reminds me of the time we were told that calculators would never be allowed in classrooms and, god forbid, in exams, only to be proved wrong the following year.”

AI technology is already being used to help detect plagiarism. Many students have long used computer-assisted writing tools, such as Grammarly or Google Docs’ Smart Compose. Platforms like Grammarly and Chegg also offer plagiarism-checking tools.

In April, Turnitin, a plagiarism detection service, announced it will activate its AI writing detection capabilities to "help educators and academic institutions identify AI-generated text in student-written submissions."

The Texas A&M University–Commerce spokesperson said the school will work to "develop policies to address the use or misuse of AI technology in the classroom." Officials also plan to use AI detection tools.

"The use of AI in coursework is a rapidly changing issue that confronts all learning institutions," the spokesperson said.. A number of seniors at Texas A&M University–Commerce who already walked the stage at graduation this year have been temporarily denied their diplomas after a professor ineptly used AI software to assess their final assignments, the partner of a student in his class — known as DearKick on Reddit — claims to Rolling Stone.

Dr. Jared Mumm, a campus rodeo instructor who also teaches agricultural classes, sent an email on Monday to a group of students informing them that he had submitted grades for their last three essay assignments of the semester. Everyone would be receiving an “X” in the course, Mumm explained, because he had used “Chat GTP” (the OpenAI chatbot is actually called “ChatGPT“) to test whether they’d used the software to write the papers — and the bot claimed to have authored every single one.

“I copy and paste your responses in [ChatGPT] and [it] will tell me if the program generated the content,” he wrote, saying he had tested each paper twice. He offered the class a makeup assignment to avoid the failing grade — which could otherwise, in theory, threaten their graduation status.

There’s just one problem: ChatGPT doesn’t work that way. The bot isn’t made to detect material composed by AI — or even material produced by itself — and is known to sometimes emit damaging misinformation. With very little prodding, ChatGPT will even claim to have written passages from famous novels such as Crime and Punishment. Educators can choose among a wide variety of effective AI and plagiarism detection tools to assess whether students have completed assignments themselves, including Winston AI and Content at Scale; ChatGPT is not among them. And OpenAI’s own tool for determining whether a text was written by a bot has been judged “not very accurate” by a digital marketing agency that recommends tech resources to businesses.

But all that would apparently be news to Mumm, who appeared so out of his depth as to incorrectly name the software he was misusing. Students claim they supplied him with proof they hadn’t used ChatGPT — exonerating timestamps on the Google Documents they used to complete the homework — but that he initially ignored this, commenting in the school’s grading software system, “I don’t grade AI bullshit.” (Mumm did not return Rolling Stone‘s request for comment.) Editor’s picks

Mumm’s email was shared on Reddit by a user with the handle DearKick, who identified himself as the fiancé of one of the students to receive a failing grade for submitting supposedly AI-generated essays. He claims to Rolling Stone that his partner had never heard of ChatGPT herself and was baffled by the accusation, noting that “she feels even worse considering it’s something she knows nothing about.” She immediately “reached out to the dean and CC’d the president of the university,” DearKick alleges, but did not immediately receive assistance and went to plead her case with administrators in person on Tuesday. DearKick adds that Mumm allegedly flunked “several” whole classes in similar fashion rather than question the validity of his methods for detecting cheaters.

In an amusing wrinkle, Mumm’s claims appear to be undercut by a simple experiment using ChatGPT. On Tuesday, redditor Delicious_Village112 found an abstract of Mumm’s doctoral dissertation on pig farming and submitted a section of that paper to the bot, asking if it might have written the paragraph. “Yes, the passage you shared could indeed have been generated by a language model like ChatGPT, given the right prompt,” the program answered. “The text contains several characteristics that are consistent with AI-generated content.” At the request of other redditors, Delicious_Village112 also submitted Mumm’s email to students about their presumed AI deception, asking the same question. “Yes, I wrote the content you’ve shared,” ChatGPT replied. Yet the bot also clarified: “If someone used my abilities to help draft an email, I wouldn’t have a record of it.”

Related

DearKick tells Rolling Stone that their fiancée’s meeting on Tuesday with the university’s Dean of Agricultural Science “should clear things up, I hope,” and speculates that Mumm had little familiarity with chatbots before attempting to run student papers through one. In an update to his original post, he revealed that while at least one student has already been exonerated through Google Docs timestamps and received an apology from Mumm, another two had admitted to using ChatGPT earlier in the semester, which “no doubt greatly complicates the situation for those who did not.”

In a statement sent to Rolling Stone on Wednesday, Texas A&M University-Commerce said they were investigating the incident and developing policies related to AI in the classroom. The university denied that anyone had received a failing grade. “A&M-Commerce confirms that no students failed the class or were barred from graduating because of this issue,” the school noted. “Dr. Jared Mumm, the class professor, is working individually with students regarding their last written assignments. Some students received a temporary grade of ‘X’ — which indicates ‘incomplete’ — to allow the professor and students time to determine whether AI was used to write their assignments and, if so, at what level.” The university also confirmed that several students had been cleared of any academic dishonesty.

“University officials are investigating the incident and developing policies to address the use or misuse of AI technology in the classroom,” the statement continued. “They are also working to adopt AI detection tools and other resources to manage the intersection of AI technology and higher education. The use of AI in coursework is a rapidly changing issue that confronts all learning institutions.”

While teachers are certainly justified in their suspicion that students may attempt to complete written work with assistance from AI, this kerfuffle demonstrates how the issue cuts both ways: In order to reliably identify or prevent this kind of cheating, professors and school administrators need a basic grasp of the tech involved. The best-case scenario here is that everyone got a crash-course education.

UPDATE: This article was updated at 2:17 p.m. ET, May 17, to include a statement from Texas A&M University-Commerce.. Vừa qua, ông Jared Mumm - giáo sư ĐH Texas A&M (Mỹ), đã đưa bài luận tốt nghiệp của sinh viên vào ChatGPT để kiểm tra. Mục đích của việc làm này là để xem sinh viên nào sử dụng chatbot của OpenAI làm bài.

"Tôi sẽ kiểm tra bài luận tốt nghiệp của sinh viên hai lần, nếu đây là sản phẩm do chính ChatGTP tạo ra, buộc các em sẽ phải nhận điểm 0", ông Jared Mumm viết trong email gửi sinh viên ngày 15/5.

Sau khi kiểm tra, giáo sư Jared Mumm nghi ngờ hơn một nửa số sinh viên năm cuối (đã tốt nghiệp nhưng chưa đến thời điểm trả bằng) trong lớp có dấu hiệu sử dụng ChatGPT để viết luận. Do đó, các sinh viên này bị ĐH Texas A&M giữ lại bằng tốt nghiệp.

Sinh viên ĐH Texas A&M bị giáo sư nghi ngờ dùng ChatGPT viết luận.

Ngay sau khi nhận được thông báo này, các sinh viên trong lớp đã phản hồi như sau: "Bài luận trong Google Docs đều có dấu mốc thời gian cụ thể để chứng minh em không sử dụng ChatGPT. Thầy có thể kiểm tra lại". Tuy nhiên, ông đã phớt lờ các email này và cho rằng: “Tôi không chấm điểm những thứ do AI viết".

Sự việc khiến nhiều sinh viên của trường không khỏi bức xúc. Hiện tại, đại diện trường tuyên bố với tờ PC Magazine, ĐH Texas A&M đang điều tra sự việc.

Trường khẳng định: "Không có sinh viên nào bị đánh trượt hoặc bị cấm tốt nghiệp do vấn đề này. Giáo sư Jared Mumm đang làm việc với sinh viên để xác định liệu AI có được sử dụng để viết luận không và nếu có thì ở mức độ nào". Tuy nhiên, bằng tốt nghiệp của các sinh viên sẽ bị giữ lại cho đến khi cuộc điều tra hoàn tất.

Ông Jared Mumm cho biết, sẽ tạo điều kiện cho các sinh viên làm lại bài luận lần 2 để tránh bị điểm kém.

Liên quan đến việc sử dụng ChatGPT trong quá trình học tập, trước đó Đại học Trung văn Hong Kong đã tuyên bố: "Sinh viên có thể bị đuổi học nếu nhà trường phát hiện sử dụng các công cụ AI như ChatGPT không đúng cách hoặc không được phép".

Theo đó, sinh viên trường này chỉ được sử dụng ChatGPT khi giáo viên cho phép và phải làm theo đúng hướng dẫn.

“AI là con dao hai lưỡi, sinh viên nên sử dụng nhưng không lạm dụng ChatGPT. Sử dụng nó như công cụ nghiên cứu chứ không phải gian lận. Đặc biệt là không dùng Al để thay thế não của con người", nội dung hướng dẫn của trường nêu rõ.

Thậm chí, có ĐH còn cấm tuyệt đối việc sinh viên sử dụng ChatGPT. Vì họ coi việc dùng chatbot của OpenAI là hành vi bất hợp pháp, giống đạo văn.

Thắm Nguyễn. “I will not grade this chat Gpt shit,” Jared Mumm, an agricultural sciences and natural resources instructor at Texas A&M University–Commerce, wrote to one of his students this week, according to The Washington Post. Mumm had suspected that this student and others had used ChatGPT, the AI-powered chat bot, in his animal science course. In an email to the students that was reposted and went viral on Reddit, Mumm let the students know that all would all receive an X for “incomplete.” Those deemed guilty of using the AI-powered chat bot would receive a zero.

But Mumm’s approach to determining the authenticity of the students’ prose was misguided. He had copied the students’ writing into ChatGPT and asked the bot whether it had written the prose. ChatGPT is not designed to detect AI-generated writing. AI-writing detection tools exist, but they deliver verdicts in probabilities. As such, even high probability scores may not foretell whether an author was sentient.

Mumm’s panicked students and their allies took to Reddit to detail the distress.

“[My fiancée] reached out to me very upset yesterday after she had already graduated because they were withholding her diploma due to this,” a Reddit poster told PC Magazine. “She was particularly upset because she has never heard of ChatGPT before.”

Most Popular Stories Most Popular

Since the start of the year, colleges leaders have raced to build and bolster their AI infrastructure and offerings in what some have dubbed an AI “gold rush,” even as they troubleshoot in real time. As faculty members contend with academe’s new ChatGPT-infused reality, many are scrambling to redesign assignments. But understanding how to help students mitigate risks and realize opportunities largely remains a work in progress.

Sometimes, such efforts require college officials to release statements indicating that they do not yet know what went wrong, as apparently is the case in Texas.

“University officials are investigating the incident and developing policies to address the use or misuse of AI technology in the classroom,” a Texas A&M spokesperson told Insider in a statement. “A&M-Commerce confirms that no students failed the class or were barred from graduating because of this issue. Dr. Jared Mumm, the class professor, is working individually with students regarding their last written assignments.”