. Ahead of the election in Turkey, President Erdogan showed a video linking his main challenger Kilicdaroglu to the PKK militant organization. The footage, however, was manipulated, a fact Erdogan said doesn't concern him.

Only days before Turkey's key parliamentary and presidential election, which has been described as the most important vote in the world this year, one video is stirring significant controversy.

The video was presented by President Recep Tayyip Erdogan at a political rally on Sunday.

During the gathering, Erdogan is heard addresssing the crowd, asking "Would my national and local citizens vote for these?" He then points to a large screen behind him.

The screen shows what looks like campaign footage of Erdogan's main challenger, Kemal Kilicdaroglu, telling viewers "let's go to the ballot box together."

After a few seconds, Kilicdaroglu disappears off screen and a second person, dressed in a military uniform, appears. The footage still seems to be part of Kilicdaroglu's campaign video.

This second figure is Murat Karayilan, one of the founders of the Kurdistan Workers' Party or PKK, a militant Kurdish organization which is classified as a terrorist organization in the European Union and the United States.

Claim: With this video, Erdogan purports to link his main rival to the PKK, which the Turkish government also considers to be a terrorist group. But is the video shown by Erdogan real? Did Karayilan appear in Kilicdaroglu's campaign video to show his support?

DW Fact check: False.

Research by DW's fact-checking team in cooperation with DW's Turkish service shows that the video at the campaign rally was manipulated by combining two separate videos with totally different backgrounds and content.

This video presented by Erdogan comes after experts warned of increased manipulation on Turkish social media ahead of the election.

Two videos in one

On May 14, Turkey will elect a new parliament and a new president. Image: Umit Turhan Coskun/NurPhoto/picture alliance

The first of the two videos is Kilicdaroglu's original campaign video, which can be viewed in full here, on his verified YouTube channel . It is a typical political ad that asks people to vote, and promises victory at the polls. But it does not contain footage of Karayilan, or the PKK.

The edited footage shown by Erdogan, which is a close-up of the original, likely is lifted from the scene beginning at second 00:37 in Kilicdaroglu's ad.

This timestamp can be identified by focusing on Kilicdaroglu's words ("let's go to the ballot box together"), the movement of his right arm, and the young people standing behind him.

However, in the original campaign video, the scene that follows immediately after does not show Murat Karayilan, but two women leaving a building.

Decontextualizing old footage

Meanwhile, the second video appears to be much older. It can be found by carrying out an advanced online search of similar images of Karaliyan in military dress.

The video shows the PKK leader talking about what he calls the start of the PKK's armed struggle over three decades ago, according to the website where it was published — Firat News Agency, a Kurdish outlet.

The article accompanying the video was published on August 15, 2021.

In Erdogan's manipulated video, the footage of Karayilan was likely taken from this video and decontextualized to give the impression that Karayilan was supporting Kilicdaroglu.

In sum, Erdogan presented altered footage which resulted from combining scenes from Kilicdaroglu's campaign video with an older video message by Karayilan, and editing it into one film.

But it does not appear to be, as several Turkish media argued, a deepfake — a video file created with artificial intelligence.

Read more: How do I spot a deepfake?

Political relevance

According to official figures, over 64.1 million people are eligible to vote in the Sunday elections Image: Umit Bektas/REUTERS

President Erdogan and his team might have tried to gather votes from conservative and nationalist voters with the help of tampered video footage. Kilicdaroglu reposted the video on Twitter , pointing out that it was manipulated. In a television interview , Erdogan was asked about the footage. He replied that it did not matter whether it was manipulated or not, and insisted that the claim the video made was nevertheless true.

This article was updated on May 24 to reflect the reactions of the two presidential candidates to the doctored video.

Edited by: Maren Sass. On the evening of Turkey’s most significant elections of the past two decades, Can Semercioğlu went to bed early. For the past seven years, Semercioğlu has worked for Teyit, the largest independent fact-checking group in Turkey, but that Sunday, May 14, was surprisingly one of the quietest nights he remembers at the organization.

Before the vote, opinion polls had suggested that incumbent president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan was losing support due to devastating earthquakes in southeastern Turkey that killed nearly 60,000 people and a struggling economy. However, he still managed to secure just under 50 percent of the vote. His main opponent, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, who heads the Millet Alliance group of opposition parties, received around 45 percent, meaning the two will face off in a second round scheduled for May 28.

“That night we didn’t have much work to do because people were talking about the results,” Semercioğlu says. “Opposition supporters were sad, Erdoğan supporters were happy, and that was what everybody was mostly discussing on social media.”

It was a rare moment of respite. The days leading up to the vote and afterward, as the runoff approaches, have been intense at Teyit, whose name translates into confirmation or verification. The morning after the election, reports of stolen votes, missing ballots, and other inconsistencies—most of which proved to be false or exaggerated—flooded social media. Semercioğlu says his colleagues’ working hours have doubled since early March, when Erdoğan announced the date for the election. This election cycle has been marred by a torrent of misinformation and disinformation on social media, made more difficult by a media environment that, after years of pressure from the government, has been accused of systematic bias toward the incumbent president. That has intensified as the Erdoğan administration struggles to hold onto power.

“We have been working 24/7 for a very long time. Misleading information about politicians’ backgrounds and statements was prevalent in these elections. We frequently encountered decontextualized statements, distortions, manipulation, and cheapfakes,” Semercioğlu says. But this wasn’t a surprise. And, he says. “We are seeing a similar flow in the second round.”

Fact checkers’ work has been complicated by the willingness of the candidates—from the government and the opposition—to use manipulated material in their campaigns. On May 1, a small Islamist news outlet, Yeni Akit, published a manipulated video purportedly showing the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK)—an organization designated as a terrorist group by both Turkey and the US—endorsing Kılıçdaroğlu. On May 7, the same video was shown during one of Erdoğan’s campaign rallies.

“It was surprising that Erdoğan showed a manipulated video showing Millet Alliance candidate Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu side by side with PKK militants at rallies. It was a clearly manipulated video, but it was widely spread and adopted by the public” says Semercioğlu, adding that although it was debunked by Teyit, “it was quite effective.”

The video was widely circulated and made its way into search results for the opposition candidate.

“When internet users turned to Google to search for Kılıçdaroğlu on that day, the false news was among the top suggestions made by the algorithm,” says Emre Kizilkaya, researcher and managing editor of Journo.com.tr, a nonprofit journalism website. Kizilkaya says his research has shown that Google results are a primary source of news for Turkish consumers, “who typically lack strong loyalty to particular news brands.” During the election run-up, he says Google results disproportionately favored media that was friendly to the president.. Yesterday’s election in Turkey was momentous for a variety of reasons, with major implications for regional geopolitics and the domestic economy. But historians will remember these polls for one thing in particular: the role of tech-powered disinformation.

Just days before the Sunday election, one of the best-known opposition candidates, Muharrem İnce, pulled out. An alleged sex tape had been circulating on social media and he claimed his appearance in it was the result of deepfake technology; nonetheless, he withdrew from the contest.

Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the main opposition candidate, blamed Russia for this and other disinformation doing the rounds in the run-up to the election. “Get your hands off the Turkish state,” he tweeted in Moscow’s direction while telling Reuters he had evidence of Russia’s involvement. (Russian President Vladimir Putin and incumbent Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan have a complex but generally friendly relationship, and Erdoğan’s tendency to play a divisive role within NATO suits Putin just fine in the context of his war on Ukraine.)

What difference did İnce’s departure make to the election result? It’s hard to tell. He was polling at less than 2% and, as a longstanding rival of Erdoğan—İnce was the main opposition candidate in the 2018 elections—those votes probably went to Kılıçdaroğlu.

But given that Erdoğan only barely failed to clear the 50% threshold that would have avoided the run-off that will now take place in a couple weeks—he got 49.5% to Kılıçdaroğlu’s 44.9%—this election was one where every percentage point mattered.

And the alleged İnce deepfake was not the only one out there. The fact-checking site Teyit (think Turkish Snopes) has debunked many such pieces of disinformation and one of them even got brandished by Erdoğan himself—at a rally, the president showed his supporters a Kılıçdaroğlu campaign video that had been modified to depict members of the banned PKK terrorist organization singing the opposition party’s song. Somewhat less damningly, a Twitter user claimed to have trained an A.I. on Kılıçdaroğlu’s voice and used it to generate a version of his campaign speech delivered in flawless English.

Faked photos and even videos have been around for a while, but thanks to A.I. they are so much easier to make now, in a form that convinces many of those who aren’t paying close attention—which is most people. Soon, they will be incredibly simple to generate at a quality level that will fool even more voters. From now on, as Fortune reported recently, this will be a feature of most elections, including next year’s U.S. presidential election, and I think it’s fair to say we aren’t ready.

Want to send thoughts or suggestions to Data Sheet? Drop a line here.

David Meyer

Data Sheet’s daily news section was written and curated by Andrea Guzman.

NEWSWORTHY

The fearless attitude of Twitter’s new CEO. Linda Yaccarino, the ad executive at NBC who is taking Elon Musk’s role at Twitter is a “tough” “Long Island lady” who faces a tall order of luring back advertisers who have fled the social media platform. But her background handling demanding clients and leading high-stakes industry battles over ad measurements could be a major boost. Fortune spoke to people who have worked closely with Yaccarino, and they say she might be the right balance for Musk if she can adjust to the “gutter brawling content” on Twitter that’s unlike the glitz she’s been accustomed to.

Big Tech companies are scaling back internship programs. Internships have provided a pipeline to develop new talent and bring much-needed diversity to the ranks of big tech companies. But amid layoffs and hiring freezes, college students are also facing the impact of tech’s cost-cutting measures, and multiple companies are hiring fewer interns this summer. Of the 10 large-cap tech companies that Fortune reached out to, none said they were increasing the size of their summer internship classes this year. Some, like Alphabet and Amazon, have cut their class sizes, and the shift has career coaches at universities coaxing students through concerns that they may not get the experience they had hoped to add to their résumés.

EU regulators give the go-ahead on Microsoft’s Activision Blizzard deal. Weeks after U.K. antitrust regulators blocked Microsoft’s $68.7 billion deal to acquire Activision Blizzard, the deal has been approved by EU regulators. The European Commission said the acquisition could harm competition involving the distribution of PC and console games through cloud gaming services, but that Microsoft has addressed the concerns through 10-year licensing deals it has offered to rival clouding gaming services. The EU decision should give Microsoft and Activision-Blizzard some welcome ammo as its appeal with U.K. regulators moves forward.

SIGNIFICANT FIGURES

50,000

—The penguin population in the Norwegian dependency of Bouvet Island in the South Atlantic Ocean. Wired reports that Google has made its generative A.I. service available on the bird-inhabited volcano island and to other similarly desolate territories of European countries, even though the 450 million people living in the continental European Union still can’t access Bard.

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT

Google’s Sundar Pichai thinks A.I. will spur ‘big societal labor market disruptions’ but also make professions better, by Prarthana Prakash

A.I. ‘controls humanity’ in the worst-case scenario but will probably just find us boring, says Stability AI CEO Emad Mostaque, by Steve Mollman

‘I’m copying his strategy’: Lyft’s CEO is poaching his turnaround plan from his former boss—Jeff Bezos, by Eleanor Pringle

I used ChatGPT to write a cover letter and pretty much fooled 3 experts—and an A.I. content detector, by Chloe Berger

Tesla owners ‘uniquely at the mercy’ of carmaker, says attorney in lawsuit alleging software updates drained or killed expensive batteries, by Steve Mollman

BEFORE YOU GO

The newest TikTok trend. A recipe involving Fruit Roll-Ups spread on TikTok and now Israel faces a shortage. So, people are smuggling massive amounts of Fruit Roll-Ups, which can sell for $8 per snack. The imports from flyers might be over though, the New York Times reports. In late April, an American couple was caught trying to bring in almost 375 pounds of the snacks in their suitcases. The legal limit is around 11 pounds for a specific food product. Recently, the Israeli Tax Authority confiscated 661 pounds of Fruit Roll-Ups in one week alone and has sent an undercover unit to Ben Gurion Airport.

The recipe people are so desperate to make blew up after an influencer named Golnar Ghavami shared a video earlier this year wrapping a Fruit Roll-Up around a scoop of mango ice cream, garnering more than 14 million views.. The Turkish presidential candidate Muharrem İnce withdrew from the race after the release of a purported sex tape, boosting chances of outright success for other candidates in a race that polls suggest will be close.

İnce, a two-time presidential candidate who also lost to Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in 2018, pulled his candidacy just days away from Turkey’s most consequential election in a generation saying: “I offered Turkey a third option, a third way. We couldn’t succeed with this way.”

The former school headteacher and longtime member of the Republican People’s party (CHP) said an alleged sex tape circulating online was a deepfake, using footage taken from “an Israeli porn site”.

He added: “If I had such images of myself, they were taken secretly in the past. But I do not have such an image, no such sound recording. This is not my private life, it’s slander. It’s not real.”

Polls indicate that the vote for the presidency will be a close one, where each candidate needs to get more than 50% in the first round to win outright, or face a runoff two weeks later. Erdoğan will now face CHP’s chairman, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, and the ultranationalist Sinan Oğan of the Victory party in a three-way race.

View image in fullscreen Presidential candidate and the chair of Republican People’s party, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty

İnce had a small spike in popularity in the polls in which he peaked at roughly 10% of the overall vote share and more recently dropped down to almost 2% in some polls. While İnce had long seemed unlikely to win, his dwindling vote share was still enough to ensure that the presidential race would go to a runoff, a scenario observers believe could favour Erdoğan.

İnce formed his breakaway Homeland party two years ago after two failed bids to become party chairman of the CHP, plus a failed presidential run. Kılıçdaroğlu has led the CHP since 2010, and is spearheading a six-party opposition coalition hoping to defeat Erdoğan after 20 years in power.

Hours after İnce quit the race, Kılıçdaroğlu invited him to join the opposition coalition by tweeting a link to a classic Turkish ballad. “Let’s put aside the old resentments,” he told his former rival. Oğan reportedly cancelled a planned rally and called a meeting of his advisers, but party officials declared he had no plans to withdraw.

The polling organisation Metropoll predicted late last month that İnce voters would predominantly give their votes to Erdoğan’s AKP, the CHP, with some also going to the far-right Nationalist Movement party and the nationalist İyi (Good party) in the parliamentary race.

The high-profile deployment of deepfake videos has already hit Turkey’s 45-day election cycle, after Erdoğan played an alleged deepfake that claimed to show banned Kurdish militants declaring their support for Kılıçdaroğlu at a pre-election rally last weekend.

“What I have seen in these last 45 days, I have not seen in 45 years,” said İnce.. The target of his ire was Russia, long seen as an ally of his electoral opponent Erdogan. And analysts suggest such dirty tricks from Moscow would make sense. “Russia is definitely favouring Erdogan [in the election],” says Galip Dalay at Chatham House. “They have energy and grain deals. Putin can even meet Erdogan, head of a Nato country, and so say he is not isolated and that the Nato front is not united.”

Yet Erdogan subsequently suggested that his rival’s accusations of Russian interference were no more than a ruse to deflect attention from the real culprit. “One of the candidates withdrew,” he said after Ince stood down. “Of course, it is impossible to understand why. What did [Kilicdaroglu] come up with? A tape. How did he do that? All they know is tricks.”

And just as Russia has reason to back Erdogan, Israel – provenance of the doctored sex tape, according to its victim – may have reason to see Turkey’s president unseated. “There has been difficulty, real bad blood between Israel and Turkey over the past decade,” says Dalay. “One can assume Israel would back the opposition.”

Whatever the truth about foreign meddling, though, there is little doubt that the world is watching Turkey’s election, freighted as it is with stunning geopolitical significance. Turkey has long played what an intelligence source calls “the man in the middle” – trying to leverage its position as both a Nato member and a country with close ties to Moscow. It also has a critical role in controlling the flow of refugees into Europe and, despite Erdogan’s increasingly dictatorial instincts, remains a large Muslim democracy in a region hardly overflowing with them.

With the war in Ukraine, however, the stakes have got even higher, as West and East both try to bring the world’s 11th biggest economy further into their camp. “And Turkey,” says the source, “is trying to juggle both sides.” On one hand, Ankara is blocking Sweden’s accession to Nato and buying Russian gas, but on the other, “it isn’t turning a blind eye to weapons smuggled through Turkish territorial waters. And nor has Erdogan started arguing Putin’s case in the Western camp.”

Yet if the elections are vital for the world beyond Turkey’s borders, they are also critical for Turkey. The opposition claims they are a chance to restore the country’s battered economy, whose plummeting currency and soaring 40 per cent-plus inflation has created a cost of living crisis that has made many Turks dramatically poorer. Erdogan insists, however, that only he can prevent the restoration of a secular, metropolitan elite dragging the country from its cultural roots. Turkey, he says, can be powerful and prosperous without sliding inexorably Westwards.. Misleading AI-generated content could swing voters, AI experts say. Sunday’s presidential election in Turkey is the first major vote to face this challenge.

ADVERTISEMENT

Turkish Internet users were surprised to discover that Kemal Kilicdaroglu, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s main challenger in Sunday’s election, spoke perfect English in a video posted online two weeks ago.

“The apple of my eye speaks English too. I promise you grandpa, we’re going to make you president,” a Twitter user commented, sharing the video of the 74-year-old candidate. But two days later, the independent Turkish fact-checking website Teyit revealed the video had been fabricated.

According to Teyit, which means confirmation in Turkish, the AI-generated video didn’t intend to fool anyone and was initially posted with a disclaimer.

“I constantly experiment with AI to learn about new functionalities. I created Kemal Kilicdaroglu’s voice on AI and used it for an English version of his candidacy speech,” said @ytc06, who was the first Twitter user to share the video with his 11 followers before it went viral.

The recent boom in access to AI tools is fuelling these kinds of situations, according to deepfake specialist Henry Ajder.

“When something designed to be satirical is taken out of context, it can be mistaken as real, especially if you're talking to an audience that has certain biases,” he told Euronews Next.

“Famous individuals and politicians are particularly at risk because they do a lot of speaking to the camera, staying still, looking straight down the lens. That’s an easier form of video to manipulate than if they’re moving around and their profile is changing,” he explained.

Flooding social media with deepfakes

On the same day the doctored video of him speaking English was released - mostly earning him supporters - Kilicdaroglu warned his social media followers of possible election interference.

“Playing Cambridge Analytica is beyond your capacity, boys,” he told government officials on Twitter, referring to the unauthorised use of personal data and targeted campaigning on social media to swing the 2016 US presidential election.

The upcoming Turkish presidential and parliamentary votes could end Erdogan’s 20-year rule and alterthe country’s political landscape. They are also one of the first major elections to deal with such advanced AI.

“If you can flood sophisticated and very human-sounding speech on large networks and inauthentic accounts with one narrative, that could obviously play a role in taking over a sphere,” said Ajder.

That’s exactly what Internet users have been trying to achieve in Turkey. Over the last few months, Teyit has contended with a wave of tampered content and has debunked over 150 controversial claims relating to the elections, with eight alone on May 10. Many of these were deepfakes designed to mislead readers by accusing candidates (mostly from the opposition) of terrorism and incivility.

“It's easy to recognise that kind of content is fake, but it isn’t to people who no longer think critically,” Turkish AI expert Cem Say told Euronews Next.

The majority of Turks are polarised between Erdogan and Kilicdaroglu, and polls currently predict an extremely close race between the two candidates.

The incumbent president’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) has repeatedly taken stabs at its competitors, most recently at its biggest rally in Istanbul, on May 7, when an undisclosed edit of Kilicdaroglu’s campaign video was played on giant screens.

The deepfake version had added in Murat Karayılan, a leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) - which is listed by several other countries and the EU as a terrorist organisation - clapping along to the opposition’s campaign song, while lyrics “come on, let’s all go vote” blasted from speakers.

In a video shared on social media, Erdogan asked an estimated 1.7 million supporters attending his rally “Would my national and local countrymen vote for these people?” before adding: “Look at this, it’s really important!”.

Another presidential candidate, Muharrem Ince, dropped out of the race on Thursday after the release of an alleged sex tape he said was a deepfake.

ADVERTISEMENT

What I’ve seen in the last 45 days, I’ve not come across in the past 45 years Muharrem Ince Leader of Turkey's Homeland Party

The founder and leader of the centre-left, secular and nationalist Homeland Party, who was Erdogan’s main challenger in the 2018 election, said he had suffered “character assassination” throughout this year’s campaign.

“What I’ve seen in the last 45 days, I’ve not come across in the past 45 years,” Ince said in his resignation speech.

“Fake videos, fake pictures… they put my face on a video taken from an Israeli porn website,” he added, blaming the country’s journalists and public prosecutors for not protecting him from the “fury of slander”.

Experts like Say fear even more aggressive, last-minute tactics. “Deepfakes could be used on election day with the motivation to discourage people from going to the polls or to influence their decision,” he said, adding this would leave “no time for verification”.

What can be done?

With advances in artificial intelligence showing no sign of slowing down, debunking experts are in a race against AI content generators. Just as in Turkey, deepfakes created by official sources have started making their way onto the political scene in the United States.

ADVERTISEMENT

After President Joe Biden announced he’d be running for reelection, the opposing Republican National Committee released an AI-engineered video depicting a dystopian future under a second Biden term. Experts already warn deepfakes will be one of the main challenges of the 2024 US presidential election.

“The detection side of things is a little bit depressing at the moment,” Ajder said. According to him, tools certifying the provenance of content are promising, but risk creating a media hierarchy: if real content isn’t certified, “people can dismiss it as fake when convenient,” he explained. His recommendation is to stick to media sources that are well-known and can do fact-checking.

That’s very tricky in Turkey, where 90 per cent of domestic media is under government control, according to the press freedom group Reporters Without Borders. This - combined with an October 2022 law that aims to limit “disinformation” - means very few outlets actually report on deepfakes in Turkey.

Anadolu, the Turkish government news agency, was accused of withholding the results of the 2019 Istanbul mayoral elections won by the opposition, and this month, a report by the OSCE’s election observation mission raised concerns over the impartiality of the country’s media regulation body, RTÜK.

Just days before the nation heads to the polls, Turkish independent media outlet 140journos’ post-election series is perhaps the most powerful at imagining what might come next - here again with the help of artificial intelligence. Published in March using the AI image generator Midjourney and the AI text generator ChatGPT, it offers two narratives for Turkey’s future.

ADVERTISEMENT

The first story depicts a defeated and freshly retired Erdogan. “In the beginning, it was a bit difficult. However, over time, I took the opportunity to spend more time with my family, to be closer to nature and to spend more time for myself,” a bot impersonating the politician says, while photos of him having tea in a robe illustrate the post.

In the other narrative, Erdogan has never given up power and Turkey has become a Star Wars-style empire aiming to “build universal peace”.

To the question “What were the biggest challenges in achieving this success?”, the Erdogan-impersonating AI replies: “One of our greatest challenges was to keep up with the new order of the world and the universe, and to follow technological developments closely and constantly adapt to them” - a nod to the challenge all politicians now face with AI.. Turkey’s upcoming presidential election on Sunday, May 14, is drawing global attention as it could mark the end of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s decades-long reign. To make the matter even more interesting, the Turkish current government is facing some serious accusations.

Tuncay Özkan, chairman of the Turkish opposition party (CHP), claims the has learned that the country’s government will produce deepfake propaganda material on DarkWeb against CHP ahead of the elections, local Turkish outlet Kisadalga reported on May 11.

According to Özkan, Turkey’s Directorate of Communications had contacted Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the leader of the opposition party, to inform them that fake videos will be made against the opposition on the DarkWeb. These videos include sound and image content that was manipulated using an artificial intelligence (AI) technology known as deepfake, and Özkan the payment was made to the people who will do this manipulation with (BTC).

“They conveyed that such a thing has been done and that it is against democracy, human rights, and the law. Because they were not comfortable with their conscience, they came and told us. We also have a list of names,” said Özkan.

The claims come after Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan recently showed an AI-generated video that made Kilicdaroglu appear as if he was praising the PKK – a militant political organization responsible for several terrorist attacks in Turkey.

Expert raises concerns over deepfake propaganda impact

As Turkey approaches the long-awaited presidential elections, AI experts weighed on the deepfake propaganda claims. The Sunday elections are also one of the first major elections in the world to deal with such advanced AI technology.

Henry Ajder, a deepfake specialist, believes this is a concerning matter as such convincing propaganda material could have a significant impact on the final outcome.

“If you can flood sophisticated and very human-sounding speech on large networks and inauthentic accounts with one narrative, that could obviously play a role in taking over a sphere.” – Ajder said

While there are online tools that can verify the provenance of such content, they pose a risk of building a media hierarchy. For instance, if the content is not certified, people can label it “as fake when convenient,” Ajder said.. ISTANBUL, Turkey — Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s chief rival accused Russia on Thursday of spreading “deep fakes” ahead of this weekend’s crucial general election.

Kemal Kilicdaroglu’s allegations came hours after a third-party candidate dropped out of the race after being targeted by an online smear campaign.

“Dear Russian friends,” Kilicdaroglu said on Twitter. “You are behind the montages, conspiracies, deep fakes and tapes that were exposed in this country yesterday,” he said without providing details.

“If you want our friendship after May 15, get your hands off the Turkish state. We are still in favor of cooperation and friendship.”

Polls show the secular opposition leader edging ahead of Erdogan in Sunday’s presidential ballot.

Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Newsletter email address Get it By signing up, you agree to the terms

The election will go to a May 28 runoff if no candidate picks up more than 50 percent of the vote.

Kilicdaroglu’s comments came in the heat of an increasingly dirty campaign that saw third-party candidate Muharrem Ince pull out on Thursday.

Ince announced his decision after being targeted by an online campaign that included doctored images of him meeting women and riding around in fancy cars.

Advertisement

Polls show most of Ince’s support — measured at between two and four percent — likely going to Kilicdaroglu.. May 2, 2023

ANKARA — With just 12 days to go until Turkey’s fateful elections and as polls give a knife-edge lead to Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s top rival, Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the country’s main opposition suggested on Tuesday that the ruling party was planning to try to sway the vote through deepfake audios.

Speaking in an exclusive interview with private HaberTurk television, deputy chairman of the main opposition Ozgur Ozel said they received a tip that government officials were in talks with individuals on the dark web to release some deepfake audios ahead of elections. “Some preparations are underway. … We have received a tip [in regard] to the production of deepfake audios and dissemination of these fake audios through the dark web,” he said.

Ozel’s remarks followed a cryptic midnight warning by main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) leader Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who accused Erdogan’s communications czar, Fahrettin Altun, and three of his staff members of trying to strike deals on the dark web.

“Only 2 days left until the 10 final days. Let me issue my final warning,” the main opposition leader tweeted. “The dark web world which you are trying to strike a deal with will lead you to fall into the hands of foreign intelligence. Pulling a Cambridge Analytica is beyond your capacity boys! This is my final warning.”. May 11, 2023

ANKARA — Turkey’s main opposition leader Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the top contender facing incumbent President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, accused Russia on Thursday of fabricating deepfake videos with merely three days to go until the country’s critical elections this Sunday.

In separate tweets posted in Turkish and Russian, Kilicdaroglu pointed fingers at Russia for meddling in the race by orchestrating deepfake content targeting former presidential candidate Muharrem Ince, who ended his campaign on Thursday.

“Dear Russian friends, you are behind the fabrications, conspiracies, deepfake content and tapes that were exposed in this country yesterday. If you want the continuation of our friendship after May 15, take your hands off the Turkish state. We are still in favor of cooperation and friendship,” Kilicdaroglu wrote.. Turkish presidential candidate Muharrem Ince withdrew from the race after an alleged sex tape circulated online. Ince claims it's a deepfake using footage from "an Israeli porn site."

Ince, a two-time presidential candidate who also lost to Recep Tayyip Erdogan in 2018, pulled his candidacy just days away from Turkey's most consequential election in a generation saying: "I offered Turkey a third option, a third way. We couldn't succeed."

Deepfake videos have been a key part of Turkey's 45-day election cycle. Erdogan played a deepfake that claimed to show banned Kurdish militants declaring their support for his main rival Kemal Kilicdaroglu at a pre-election rally last weekend.

The election is bitter and extremely close and could end Erdogan’s long authoritarian rule. His problem is that his economy is in tatters and mostly propped up with Russian money. There was also a terrible earthquake with a high body count which managed to show up the corruption and divisions in Turkey.

"What I have seen in these last 45 days, I have not seen in 45 years," said Ince.. . Turkish opposition alliance presidential candidate Kemal Kilicdaroglu has urged citizens to stay indoors if he defeats President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Turkey’s upcoming elections to avoid the risk of confrontation with “armed elements” loyal to the regime.

Kilicdaroglu issued the blunt warning in an interview with KRT television late on May 4 as the country prepared for a final week of campaigning ahead of May 14’s polling day.

“When we are victorious on the election night, all our citizens should stay indoors instead of rejoicing in the streets,” Kilicdaroglu said. “Some people might stir trouble, some people may be provoked, armed elements may take the streets.”

Kilicdaroglu—head of Turkey’s broadest ever opposition bloc, the six-party Nation Alliance, and formally backed by the pro-Kurdish minority People’s Democratic Alliance (HDP)—also said the opposition has intelligence that indicates it may be targeted on social media with deepfake video or voice records.

“They can make negative propaganda by changing the sound and images,” Kilicdaroglu said. “We’ve learned that they’ve made agreements with some hackers from abroad and made payments in Bitcoin.”

Erdogan on stage at a rally in Mersin on May 6 (Credit: Turkish Presidency).

Two days earlier, Kilicdaroglu addressed Erdogan officials on Twitter with warnings against the emergence of a disinformation campaign, writing: “There are two days left until the final ten days [before the parliamentary and presidential elections]. Let me give my last warning. Fahrettin Altun, Serhat and their teammates Cagatay and Evren; The dark web world you are trying to deal with will lead you into the hands of foreign intelligence. Playing Cambridge Analytica is beyond your capacity, boys. LAST WARNING!”

Turkey’s communications minister, Fahrettin Altun, responded sharply on Twitter to the accusations against the group consisting of himself, his two deputies and Serhat Eroglu, head of the communication ministry’s data processing department.

“Kilicdaroglu has once again tried to defame our Directorate of Communication,” Altun said, “who work day and night for the strategic communication of our country and have achieved great success in the fight against systematic disinformation against our country.

“It is unacceptable for any politician who has embraced democracy to indulge in the politics of gossip and slander… we fight against disinformation, which we see as one of the biggest enemies of democracy, and inform national and international public opinion accurately, quickly and transparently.”

Responding to fears that there could be attempts to rig the vote to ensure he does not defeat Turkish leader of two decades Erdogan, 74-year-old Kilicdaroglu has told how the combined opposition has worked hard for more than a year and a half to assemble enough observers to have more than one in each polling station in the country of 85mn.

Kilicdaroglu—a quietly spoken former economist and civil servant who pledges to restore democratic freedoms lost under Erdogan and hopes for resounding support in these elections from the five million Turks who for the first time are old enough to vote—told the BBC last week that Nation Alliance would be vigilant, trusting neither the president, "nor his Supreme Election Council nor his judges".

On fears that Erdogan will not depart office quietly if he loses, he added: "We will retire him, and send him to his corner. He will step back quietly. No one should have any concerns about it."

Those not so certain that that will prove to be the case note various worrying comments in the past week, including remarks from Erdogan’s interior minister, Suleyman Soylu, in which he warned that the vote will be a “coup attempt by the West”.

Trailing Kilicdaroglu in the polls, Erdogan, 69, has stepped up his polarising rhetoric on the campaign trail.

“My nation will not surrender this country to the one who becomes president with the support of Qandil,” Erdogan told supporters in Ankara on May 1, referencing the Qandil mountains on the Iraq-Iran border where the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which has waged a 39-year insurgency against the Turkish state, has its main base.

Erdogan, who has also talked of making Kilicdaroglu a “political corpse”, has also gone on the attack with identity politics, talking of the opposition parties of being pro-LGBT. “We are not pro-LGBT, we are against LGBT. The Republican People’s Party [CHP] is pro-LGBT, the Good Party [IYI Party] is LGBT, and the Peoples’ Democratic Party [HDP] is pro-LGBT. Family is sacred to us.”

Underscoring the HDP’s endorsement of Kilicdaroglu, the jailed former co-leader of the party, Selahattin Demirtas, referred to him as “Turkey’s 13th President”, tweeting on May 3: “Turkey’s 13th President Mr. Kilicdaroglu, may God speed you. I sincerely believe that you will end factionalism, ensure social peace and bring Turkey prosperity and serenity. My vote is for you, Mr. #CumhurbaşkanıKılıçdaroğlu."

If the Erdogan camp does retain confidence that their man will triumph despite enthusiasm for Kilicdaroglu, that confidence is not so robust that they are content to ignore negative headlines in the international media.

The week closed with Erdogan’s foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, pulling an article he’d submitted to The Economist, after the weekly pictured “Save Democracy” and “Erdogan Must Go” pins on a cover devoted to the Turkish elections.

The British magazine described Turkey’s ballot as the most important election of 2023, adding in the cover story: “If Turkey sacks its strongman, democrats everywhere should take heart.”

Cavusoglu asked why the publication was “attempting to intervene in the internal politics of a country”, while Erdogan said in a Twitter post: “We will not allow our domestic politics to be directed and the national will to be swayed by the covers of magazines that are the operational apparatus of global powers.”. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s main political opponent accused Russia of using deepfakes and other artificial intelligence (AI)-generated material to meddle in the country’s upcoming presidential election.

"The Russians have a vested interest in backing an Erdogan presidency to ensure that he basically stays in power, mainly because the Russians benefit [from] driving a wedge between Turkey and NATO, and they've been very successful about that in the last decade or so," Sinan Ciddi, non-resident senior fellow on Turkey at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, told Fox News Digital.

"So, in the last several days, weeks, it has been credibly reported by Turkish sources that Russian bot accounts, Twitter accounts, all sorts of disinformation campaigns have started pressing the thumb down on backing the Erdogan presidency, and that comes as no surprise."

The election, scheduled for May 14 alongside parliamentary elections, has proven difficult for Erdogan as his election rival Kemal Kilicdaroglu maintains a slight lead in opinion polls.

META ANNOUNCES AI IMAGE GENERATION TOOLS FOR ADVERTISERS

The race has already seen another candidate, Muharrem Ince, drop out after claiming he was the victim of a faked "character assassination" online.

Ince claimed an alleged sex tape released online was created using deepfake technology, which fabricates videos and images that can look and sound like real people and events, using footage "from an Israeli porn site," The Guardian reported.

"I do not have such an image, no such sound recording," Ince said. "This is not my private life, it’s slander. It’s not real.

"What I have seen in these last 45 days, I have not seen in 45 years."

AI COULD BECOME THE WORLD'S WEATHERMAN AS HUMAN-DESIGNED MODELS MAY BE ON THE WAY OUT

News agencies have covered instances of deepfakes and other material that many allege to have originated from Russian agents. Another high-profile instance saw Erdogan playing an alleged deepfake video that appeared to show Kurdish militants supporting his rival.

Kilicdaroglu accused Turkey's "Russian friends" of responsibility for "the release in this country yesterday of montages, plots, deepfake content."

"If you want to continue our friendship after May 15, withdraw your hand from the Turkish state. We are still in favor of cooperation and friendship," he said on Twitter Thursday evening in both Turkish and Russian.

Teyit, a Turkey-based verification platform that analyzes the accuracy of dubious online content, has already debunked over 150 controversial election claims, Euronews reported. Many of the claims were based on deepfake material that tried to accuse candidates of terrorism and incivility.

HOLLYWOOD WRITERS' STRIKE HIGHLIGHTS AI: INDUSTRY CREATIVES ‘SHOULD BE CONCERNED’ FOR FUTURE, EXPERT SAYS

"It's easy to recognize that kind of content is fake, but it isn’t to people who no longer think critically," Turkish AI expert Cem Say told Euronews.

Experts have already raised concerns as to how some bad actors might utilize AI technology to interfere in upcoming elections. Sen. Pete Ricketts during a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee hearing earlier this year referenced China and its alleged use of deepfake videos to spread propaganda on social media platforms.

Aiden Buzzetti, president of the Bull Moose Project, told Fox News Digital AI technology will be able to do more than just create misleading deepfake images and videos.

CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

"AI involvement in elections could upend the large portions of campaign strategy from data-driven collection to dirty tricks," Buzzetti said. "Artificial intelligence tools could bolster the impact of targeting specific voters to articulate a campaign message — as well as trash opponents.

"Unethical campaign consultants could utilize AI deepfake tools to create inflammatory and outwardly false representations of federal officials and candidates, or even, potentially illegally, use robocalls in a candidate's voice to present them in a negative and destructive way."

Reuters contributed to this report.. . President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan shocked many during an election rally in İstanbul on Sunday when he played a deepfake video portraying the opposition as connected to a terrorist group.

Seeking to extend his two-decade-long rule in the presidential election on May 14, Erdoğan addressed his supporters at a big rally in İstanbul’s now-closed Atatürk Airport in Yeşilköy.

Erdoğan, who has been accusing the opposition and their joint presidential candidate Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu of working hand-in-hand with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), stopped at one point to show a video without telling his supporters it had been altered.

Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan, İstanbul Mitingi'nde Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu'nun "Haydi" reklam filmine PKK'lı Murat Karayılan’ın videosunu montajlayıp PKK'lılar CHP'nin şarkısını söylüyorlar gibi izlettirdi. pic.twitter.com/BgJy5O1Wot — 23 DERECE (@yirmiucderece) May 7, 2023

In the video, which begins with Kılıçdaroğlu singing the opposition’s election song, Murat Karayılan, a senior PKK leader, is also seen singing the same song while clapping his hands.

The PKK, listed as a terrorist organization by Turkey and much of the international community, has been waging a bloody campaign in Turkey’s southeast since 1984.

“Would my nationalist citizens vote for them?” Erdoğan asked. “Look, this is very important,” he said as the video was being played.

The CHP leader had already warned last week about the use of possible “Cambridge Analytica-style” tactics and the use of deepfake videos 10 days before the elections, sparking a debate on election meddling.

Cambridge Analytica, a now-defunct British political consulting firm, became infamous for its involvement in the manipulation of voter data and targeted political advertising during the 2016 US presidential election. The company’s tactics have since become synonymous with data privacy violations and unethical practices in election campaigns.

Kılıçdaroğlu also said the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) had hired foreign hackers to launch an online campaign against him days before the elections and paid them in bitcoin.

He said the hackers were hired to spread negative propaganda about him and his party by altering videos and images of him.

Deepfake technology can be used to create realistic-looking videos or audio recordings of people saying or doing things they never actually did, which can be used for malicious purposes such as spreading fake news, disinformation or propaganda.

“They know they will lose the election. [That’s why] they’re searching for ways to win the election with slanders and lies. … This shows they’re in a state of panic,” Kılıçdaroğlu said, referring to the ruling party.

Observers say Erdoğan is facing the most challenging election of his two-decade rule as he trails Kılıçdaroğlu in the polls.

The alliance led by Kılıçdaroğlu has pledged to restore democracy, release jailed opposition figures, revive freedom of expression and return to economic orthodoxy if it wins the parliamentary and presidential elections on May 14. Their goal is to undo President Erdoğan’s two-decade legacy of highly centralized rule.. Not to sound too much like Kamala Harris during one of her peregrinations on the nature of time, but the thing about the future is that it catches up with you awfully fast.

For a while we have been warned about the dangers of artificial intelligence and the special hazards of ‘deepfakes’. It seemed so futuristic when we saw a deepfake of Barack Obama some years ago, which demonstrated how easy it was to put words into someone’s mouth that they did not say. Well, now we have had an example in real time. Or at least the electorate in Turkey have.

Personally I am not persuaded that Turkey’s election was ever likely to be entirely fair and free. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan once said that democracy is like a tram: you take it until it gets you to your destination – the destination, presumably, being such a time as elections become unnecessary. Never-theless the country did go through the election process this week. And despite a surprisingly knife-edge result, the most interesting thing was actually what happened a few days before the election, when a sex tape was released featuring one of the candidates – Muharrem Ince. The candidate immediately denounced the tape as a ‘deepfake’.

In the era of deepfakes, how is the voting public to know what is true and what is not?

I should stress at this point that I have not gone online to search out the tape in question and assess its provenance. All I do know is the candidate was swift to cite ‘deepfake’ in his defence. And not just deepfake, but dastardly, Israeli-originated deepfake. Ince was not content with simply denying the tape was real: it had to be the work of the Israelis.

This is a popular and common enough move in Turkey, as it is across much of the Islamic world. Get into a spot of bother and you can always claim that the Israelis are to blame. Some readers might remember that moment some years ago when Lord Ahmed of Rotherham killed a man on the M1 by accidentally hitting the victim’s crashed car just after he had been texting. Lord Ahmed received a short prison sentence for dangerous driving and subsequently cropped up on television in his native Pakistan explaining to an interviewer that his conviction had been overturned. (It hadn’t.) And that his harsh sentencing had, in fact, been down to the Jews. Lord Ahmed declined to elaborate on this point. In any case, this was explanation enough for Pakistani television. Though sadly for Lord Ahmed he could not blame the Jews when he was convicted some years later of child sexual abuse.

But I digress. Turkey’s presidential candidate seems to have imagined that hinting that the purported sex tape was not just a deepfake, but an Israeli deepfake, would go down well with the Turkish public. The tape was released just before the final polls. And in the candidate’s opinion this was a shame, because Ince – who also ran in the 2018 election in Turkey – said that he was offering Turkey ‘a third option, a third way’.

Most popular Gavin Mortimer France’s schools are succumbing to the Islamist threat

Instead of being able to offer the Turkish people this third way of doing things, though, poor Ince had to pull out – of the race that is. And it is probably all for the good. Because at present a couple of days is not enough for the world to determine whether a sex tape is the real article or a piece of mischief-making. I pity the candidate who would want to try to prove this point. After all, there are only two ways in which you can really get absolved in such a matter and have it swing in your favour.

The first is to invite the entire voting public to view the sex tape and decide for themselves whether it is the genuine article or not. The other is to have some sort of press conference, with an overhead projector and perhaps one of those laser pointer jobbies, the better to point to those portions of the tape which should be viewed with particular suspicion by the voting public.

My point is that this could be seen as almost the epitome of a lose-lose situation. Whichever way you go, you are merely solidifying the question of ‘sex’ and ‘tape’ in the minds of the voting public. Not something which is likely to be a vote-winner, unless you happen to look an awful lot like a swimwear model (which Ince does not). And quite possibly not even then.

But somewhere within this sorry modern tale is a deeper lesson. In recent years I have commented with some regularity that the treadmill of technological progress on which we are running is going at too high a speed for our legs to keep carrying us. Even before the era of deepfakes we were at risk of being thrown off the treadmill. Now perhaps we are indeed at the throwing-off stage.

For how is a voting public to know what is true and what is not? If something in any way scandalous dropped before an election in a more developed democracy, how would we be able to know whether the material was true or not? Would we trust our intelligence services to tell us? Would Americans?

Unlock unlimited access, free for a month then subscribe from as little as £1 a week after that SUBSCRIBE

How would a candidate be able to undo any damage that had been done in time to keep themselves in the running? And how to discern the difference between an unscrupulous candidate who is willing to say any old thing to get himself out of a tricky situation and actual deepfake interference? The public at large have enough difficulty agreeing on the first of these two, never mind with the additional challenge of the second.

I do not know how this will go. All I do know is that while Muharrem Ince no longer has to prepare for government, the lesson of his abortive political career is that we should try to prepare for the future that has already arrived.. Kremlin 'strongly' denies Kılıçdaroğlu's accusations of meddling in vote

ANKARA

The Kremlin on May 12 denied it was meddling in Türkiye's presidential election campaign, after Turkish leader Recep Tayyip Erdoğan's main rival accused Moscow of spreading "deep fakes" targeting him.

"We strongly reject such statements," Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said.

"We officially declare: there can be no talk of any interference."

"If someone provided Mr Kılıçdaroğlu with such information, they are liars," Peskov said.

Republican People’s Party (CHP) leader and Nation Alliance’s presidential candidate Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu accused Russia on May 11 of fabricating deepfake videos ahead of the key May 14 polls.

“Dear Russian friends, you are behind the fabrications, conspiracies, deepfake content and tapes exposed in this country yesterday. If you want the continuation of our friendship after May 15, take your hands off the Turkish state. We are still in favor of cooperation and friendship,” he tweeted.

Meanwhile, CHP adviser Erdoğan Toprak also said they were receiving reports that Russia was intervening in the Turkish elections.

“We think that some covert moves aimed at the campaign are underway. We don’t want these. We want our centuries-old relationship to continue like this,” he told daily Sözcü on May 11.

Muharrem İnce, one of the four presidential contenders, announced his decision to withdraw from the race on May 11 and expressed his fury over conspiracies against him that included a “fake” sex videotape circulated on social media on May 10.

Ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) spokesperson Ömer Çelik called on the CHP to share the relevant information with state institutions if they have received such a piece of information.

“I can’t talk about a country by stating that someone said something. I know that this is harmful to the life of the state and the nation. If you hear of something, go and share it with the relevant institutions,” Çelik said.

Commenting on Muharrem İnce’s withdrawal from the presidential race, Interior Minister Süleyman Soylu blamed the U.S. for interfering in Türkiye’s elections.

“America has been interfering with this election from the very beginning,” Soylu said in a televized interview on May 12.

Soylu claimed that U.S. President Joe Biden earlier said that his country was not able to interfere in the Turkish politics in the 2016 coup attempt. The minister suggested that Biden also said, “This time, we will do it with an election and not a coup.”

“The [U.S.’] basic logic is ‘If İnce was the former CHP candidate, we would get the votes that went to him.’”. . May 25, 2023

ISTANBUL — Claims and counterclaims, montaged videos and even fake sex tapes have blighted Turkey’s elections, leaving fact-checkers battling to unravel a mass of disinformation during the campaign.

Voters return to the polling booths for a second time on Sunday to decide whether President Recep Tayyip Erdogan will extend his 20-year rule by another five years or if opposition challenger Kemal Kilicdaroglu will become the country’s 13th president.

A lengthy electoral campaign has seen politicians from all sides make unsubstantiated assertions, further obscuring the facts in what is widely seen as Turkey’s most vital vote in recent years.

Probably the clearest example comes from Erdogan’s campaign in the form of a montage video purporting to show the leadership of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) backing Kilicdaroglu.. Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who is President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s main rival, says Moscow is behind ‘deepfake content’.

Turkey’s main opposition candidate has accused Russia of interfering in the country’s elections days before the crucial vote.

Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who is challenging Turkey’s longtime leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Sunday’s presidential ballot, said “foreign hackers” recruited by his rival are preparing deepfakes – manipulated videos and soundbites – aimed at discrediting the opposition days before the election.

“Dear Russian friends … you are behind the montages, conspiracies, deepfake content and tapes that were exposed in this country,” he said on Thursday without explaining why he was blaming Russia.

“If you want our friendship after May 15, get your hands off the Turkish state,” the main opposition alliance’s candidate added in tweets written in Turkish and Russian.

The allegations came hours after a third-party candidate dropped out of the race after being targeted by an online smear campaign.

On Friday, Kilicdaroglu told the Reuters news agency his party has evidence of Russia’s for responsibility for the release of “deep fake” online content.

Moscow rejects claims

In response to Kilicdaroglu’s claims, Kremlin on Friday denied it was meddling in Turkey’s presidential election campaign.

“We strongly reject such statements,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said.

“We officially declare: There can be no talk of any interference.”

“If someone provided Mr Kilicdaroglu with such information, they are liars,” Peskov said.

He added that Moscow “highly values” its bilateral relations with Ankara.

“Turkey has a very responsible, sovereign and thought-through position on a whole range of regional and global problems that we face,” Peskov said.

Russia and Turkey have retained close ties throughout the Ukraine conflict, with Erdogan often acting as a mediator who talks to both Moscow and Kyiv.

The critical presidential and parliamentary elections will take place on May 14 amid an economic crisis in the country.

Polls show the secular opposition leader edging ahead of Erdogan in Sunday’s presidential ballot.