When wildfires swept across Maui last month with destructive fury, China’s increasingly resourceful information warriors pounced.

The disaster was not natural, they said in a flurry of false posts that spread across the internet, but was the result of a secret “weather weapon” being tested by the United States. To bolster the plausibility, the posts carried photographs that appeared to have been generated by artificial intelligence programs, making them among the first to use these new tools to bolster the aura of authenticity of a disinformation campaign.

For China — which largely stood on the sidelines of the 2016 and 2020 U.S. presidential elections while Russia ran hacking operations and disinformation campaigns — the effort to cast the wildfires as a deliberate act by American intelligence agencies and the military was a rapid change of tactics.

Until now, China’s influence campaigns have been focused on amplifying propaganda defending its policies on Taiwan and other subjects. The most recent effort, revealed by researchers from Microsoft and a range of other organizations, suggests that Beijing is making more direct attempts to sow discord in the United States.. Social media disinformation that is playing a major role in mistrust among some Lahaina fire survivors was stoked by China — including a claim that the fire started from secret government testing of a “weather weapon.”

China’s disinformation campaign about the cause of the deadly Lahaina fire, as reported Monday by The New York Times, follows online conspiracy theories that continue as fire survivors face an uncertain future and feel left out of decisions about what comes next in their lives, said state Sen. Angus McKelvey, whose Lahaina home was destroyed in the disaster.

ADVERTISING

McKelvey lost his three-bedroom condo on Limahana Place and with other survivors is sheltered in a Kaanapali hotel. Their “trust in government is down to an epic low,” said McKelvey (D, West Maui-Maalaea-South Maui).

The chair of the Senate government operations committee said he has yet to be consulted on any future steps for Lahaina, West Maui and fire survivors.

China took advantage of mistrust and an information vacuum to spread misinformation about the Aug. 8 wildfire that killed at least 115 people, according to the Times.

McKelvey said the conspiracy theory that the natural disaster was caused by a U.S. “weather weapon” also was spread after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and other major natural catastrophes.

But disenfranchised survivors on Maui and even in Nanakuli on Oahu are willing to listen to wild theories, unaware they were spread by China, McKelvey said.

“Let’s be real, China’s our enemy in a Cold War situation,” he said. “This is what they and Russia do. They see opportunities on social media to basically destabilize and to stir up and weaponize (political) parties leading up to the next elections.”

U.S. Rep. Jill Tokuda represents rural Oahu and the neighbor islands and has organized events on Maui to connect survivors to aid and a wide range of resources.

She condemned China for the disinformation campaign while survivors, family members of victims, Hawaii and much of the world continue to grieve.

“Weaponizing loss of life and tragedy for strategic or political gain is absolutely unacceptable,” Tokuda told the Honolulu Star-Advertiser in an email Monday. “Reports that certain foreign governments generated disinformation and shared harmful content is disgusting. It is sickening that anyone would take advantage of our people and community as they grieve, and it is a mockery of our pain and our loss. Hawaii has shared its aloha and opened her doors to people from around the world. We deserve better, and so do the people of those countries seeking to pirate in misinformation.”

State Rep. Gene Ward (R, Hawaii Kai-Kalama Valley) has long worried about Chinese propaganda and influence in Hawaii — concerns that were amplified after suspected Chinese surveillance balloons were spotted in Hawaii and parts of the mainland, including one that was shot down by a U.S. warplane in February off the coast of South Carolina.

Ward called the New York Times report “probably a little more diabolical (than the balloons) by playing on the heart strings of these grieving people.”

“Should we be surprised China is at work doing its best to undermine the United States?” Ward asked. “They’re trying to undermine faith in the U.S. government and create confusion among Americans in general about how we treat our island family.”

At his monthly Beer Summit /Leadership Forum on Thursday at the Hawaii Kai Shopping Center’s Greek Marina, Ward was surprised by the pushback he received by mentioning online “conspiracy theories” in the aftermath of the Lahaina fire.

“They thought it was impolite to call them conspiracies, these ideas that the fire was caused by laser beams or microwaves,” Ward said. “They thought that these theories were deserving of respect. I thought, ‘Wow. This is my district. These are my people.’ They came back and pushed back on me. I didn’t mean to demean anyone.”

On Friday, U.S. Sen. Mazie Hirono marked one month since the deadliest U.S. wildfire in over a century by standing on the Senate floor and condemning the spread of misinformation on social media, driven in part by foreign governments, which she said has discouraged some Maui residents from accessing assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency and stoked distrust in the federal government.

At “a time of grief and loss, residents have been subjected to disinformation on social media, likely coordinated by foreign government entities, to discourage residents from reaching out to FEMA for disaster assistance, and disinformation that sowed distrust in the federal government,” Hirono said.

Through FEMA, the U.S. Small Business Administration and “dozens” of other agencies and organizations, Hirono said, thousands of survivors were relocated into hotel rooms, Airbnbs and other short-term shelters.

“To date, more than $50 million in federal assistance to individuals has already been approved,” Hirono said. “Federal personnel have also been critical to the search and rescue efforts, coming from around the country to help search through the rubble and identify the remains of those lost.”

On Monday, Hirono elaborated on her Senate comments in an email to the Star-Advertiser.

“At a time of grief and loss, Maui residents have been subjected to disinformation on social media, likely coordinated by foreign government entities such as Russia and China, to discourage them from reaching out to FEMA for assistance and sow distrust in the federal government,” Hirono wrote. “For anyone, let alone foreign governments, to push these baseless lies and conspiracies amid a national disaster is dangerous and cruel. It’s an all hands on deck effort to combat this kind of disinformation and make sure those impacted by the fire have the support and information they need.”. Researchers say they’ve discovered 85 social media accounts and blogs originating from China and working in tandem to amplify a conspiracy theory claiming the deadly fires in Maui were caused by a secretive “weather weapon” unleashed by the US military. NewsGuard, which has previously uncovered other online influence operations from China and Russia, claims the new “coordinated online campaign” represents the most expansive Chinese operation it has uncovered to date.

How Conspiracy Theories and Disinformation Spiral Out of Control on the Internet | TechModo CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video How Conspiracy Theories and Disinformation Spiral Out of Control on the Internet | TechModo

The conspiracy-laden content was written in 15 different languages and appeared on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and around a dozen other platforms. Though the exact phrasing of the posts varied, they largely stemmed from a scandalous, baseless conspiracy theory involving the US military, British spies, and experimental sci-fi weaponry. Buckle up for some tinfoil hat activity.

Advertisement

What is the conspiracy theory about?

Several of the posts shared by NewsGuard show users describing a new bombshell report from British Intelligence Service MI6. The report, which isn’t real, supposedly cites a “defected US military scientist” with a guilty conscience approached the spy agency and exposed the military’s secretive new “weather weapon” that used “scientific and technological means to manipulate the power of nature.”

Advertisement

This mythical super weapon supposedly lets the military harness floods, volcanic eruptions, extreme storms, and, yes, fires against its foes. Online accounts trumpeting the conspiracy theory claim the US intends to use its weapon of mass weather destruction against Russia and “anti-American” countries in the Middle East. So where does Maui come into play? Well, the posters go on to claim the Maui fire “did not happen naturally” and was instead a byproduct of the US military flagrantly experimenting with its new wonder weapon. One of the posts shared on the blogging site Medium claimed the US military not only unleashed the weapon on Hawaii but is boldly even attempting to repossess the damaged lands for nefarious government ends.

“The news shocked and frightened governments and people around the world,” the accounts alleged. “Everyone is worried whether the US government will use ‘weather weapons’ again to attack other countries.”

Advertisement

“This Hawaiian wildfire is just a ‘weather weapon’ attack experiment conducted by the US military!” another post reads.

MI6 and the State Department did not immediately respond to Gizmodo’s requests for comment.

Advertisement

Who was behind the online campaign?

To be clear, there’s no evidence the US military is working on, or could even theoretically produce, a weapon capable of summoning fires and floods on command. Though the precise starting point of the deadly fires remains unclear, a local electrical company recently said it was partly at fault for failing to shut down power in August when the state experienced extremely dry conditions and heavy winds.

Advertisement

NewsGuard says it traced the conspiracy theory back to a post on the Chinese platform called 163.com in early August. From there, the accounts reportedly jumped platforms and made their way to Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and around 10 other sites by mid-August. By September, the posts appeared on over a dozen platforms with posts attempting to target users from a wide variety of countries. Some of the shady accounts interacted with each other to boost their content and used the hashtag #meteorologicalweapon to amplify the falsehoods. Many of the posts appeared to have replies and likes generated by bot accounts trying to make it appear as if humans were organically interacting with them.

In an email to Gizmodo, Meta confirmed the accounts shared by NewsGuard were part of a disinformation operation called Spamouflage that originated in China. That campaign, which dates back to 2019, was linked to another trove of inauthentic Facebook accounts and pages detected recently highlighted by Meta researchers. Meta said the accounts mentioned in the NewsGuard report were unsuccessful in their attempts to reach real audiences on Facebook.

Advertisement

When asked for comment, a spokesperson from YouTube highlighted the company’s efforts at promoting reputable news sources during emergency scenarios.

“During major news events, such as the horrific fires in Hawaii, our systems are designed to raise up content from authoritative sources in search results and recommendations,” YouTube spokesperson Elena Hernandez said. “We use Top News shelves, Fact Check panels, and Developing News panels to make sure viewers have as much context and information as possible from a range of authoritative sources.

Advertisement

NewsGuard says it couldn’t confirm if the coordinated accounts were taking orders from the Chinese government, but they said there is good reason to believe they originated with Chinese-speaking users. For starters, the researchers say the first posts in Chinese were shared at least two days before the first posts in other languages. Many of the accounts, NewsGuard notes, only appeared to publish content that aligned with the Chinese government’s interest. Some of the posts in other languages also had odd phrasings that NewsGuard interprets as telltale signs they may have been translated from Chinese. The accounts also had similar names and profile photos of inauthentic accounts.

Still, despite its wide scope, the campaign doesn’t seem to have been particularly effective. The campaign, aside from several sites where metrics are more difficult to measure, The accounts only managed to garner 564 total interactions across several social networks, a measly sum.. HONOLULU (HawaiiNewsNow) - A disinformation campaign that sprung up almost immediately after wildfires ravaged Maui was spread by China and Russia, researchers have concluded.

And, they say, that campaign made the government’s response to the disaster even more difficult.

From weather warfare to floating bodies on another island to thousands of missing children to a Maui land grab, experts say online posts about the wildfires might have started as genuine concern.

But they also said China and Russia are now using artificial intelligence to amplify false messages and spread fear, division and distrust in government.

Caroline Amy Orr Bueno, a University of Maryland postdoctoral research associate and digital deception expert, said the online rumors started the day after the Aug. 8 fire.

One phrase “Hawaii, not Ukraine” was similar in messaging to what was seen online after the Ohio train derailment disaster.

“They link that to the U.S. providing support to Ukraine. The idea is the reason that the aid to Hawaii was inadequate was because our attention and our resources were going to Ukraine,” said Bueno.

“It was the same narrative with this overarching idea pitting the support for Ukraine against support for a local community,” she added.

Gov. Josh Green reacted to research on HNN’s “Spotlight Now,” saying the disinformation is disappointing — and dangerous.

“When you start talking about laser beams and heat rays coming from space that would take out a people on Maui, coming on let’s get real,” Green said.

Green added that he’ll take his disinformation concerns to President Biden.

“They used that to sow discontent and doubt suggesting to our own social media types that there were thousands of children gone,” he said.

New York Times correspondent Steven Lee Myers, who covers misinformation, told Hawaii News Now that Maui wildfire rumors had photos generated by artificial intelligence.

They were on all digital platforms and in multiple languages.

He says it’s hard to tell if China and Russia started the rumors or amplified once it was online.

“This was a particularly terrible tragedy and in that moment, you see the Chinese, you see the Russians coming in and jumping on maybe people’s genuine upset with the government,” he said.

“People are hurting, people are upset, they are looking for answers and in that space I think people can be vulnerable,” he added.

Experts also said that platforms like Facebook have taken down several pages linked to China, but say they need to do more.

Copyright 2023 Hawaii News Now. All rights reserved.