By Coalter Palmer | Published on Sept. 28, 2023

A network of 17 TikTok accounts appears to be leveraging hyper-realistic audio AI voice technology to gain hundreds of millions of views on conspiracy content that sounds authentically human, NewsGuard has found. The accounts seem to be using AI text-to-speech software to instantly generate narration and other voices in the videos, demonstrating a novel way bad actors can leverage AI software to quickly and cheaply produce false content that reaches vast audiences.

In September 2023, NewsGuard found that since the first of these accounts began posting in June 2023, the network has produced approximately 5,000 videos, many featuring voiceovers apparently generated by AI. In total, videos posted to these accounts have received 336 million views and 14.5 million likes as of Sept. 25, 2023.

Baseless narratives pushed by the AI narrators in these videos include the claim that former U.S. President Barack Obama was connected to the death of his personal chef Tafari Campbell; that TV show host Oprah Winfrey is a “sex trader”; that actor Jamie Foxx was left paralyzed and blind by the COVID-19 vaccine; and that comedian Joan Rivers was murdered for claiming that Obama was gay.

For example, a July 2023 video posted by an account that goes by @e.news.tv featured a female narrator with a polished tone delivering a three-minute “news” report that baselessly linked Obama to the death of his personal chef. The video began with an AI narrator stating, “Obama has reacted to Sherise Campbell blaming him for the death of her husband Tafari Campbell. Here’s what he had to say about it.”

This introduction, seemingly read by an AI narrator, was followed by audio of a robotic, clearly AI-generated “Obama” reading a statement on Campbell’s death. “While I cannot comprehend the basis of the allegations made against me, I urge everyone to remember the importance of unity, understanding, and not rushing to judgements,” the Obama voice stated. As of Sept. 27, 2023, the video had garnered more than 50,700 views on TikTok.

In fact, a Politifact review found no evidence that Campbell’s wife has ever blamed Obama for the death of her husband, and there is no evidence of the authenticity of the statement being read by the Obama AI voice.. The technology used to create A.I. voices has gained traction and wide acclaim since companies like ElevenLabs released a slate of new tools late last year. Since then, audio fakes have rapidly become a new weapon on the online misinformation battlefield, threatening to turbocharge political disinformation ahead of the 2024 election by giving creators a way to put their conspiracy theories into the mouths of celebrities, newscasters and politicians.

The fake audio adds to the A.I.-generated threats from “deepfake” videos, humanlike writing from ChatGPT and images from services like Midjourney.

Disinformation watchdogs have noticed the number of videos containing A.I. voices has increased as content producers and misinformation peddlers adopt the novel tools. Social platforms like TikTok are scrambling to flag and label such content.

The video that sounded like Mr. Obama was discovered by NewsGuard, a company that monitors online misinformation. The video was published by one of 17 TikTok accounts pushing baseless claims with fake audio that NewsGuard identified, according to a report the group released in September. The accounts mostly published videos about celebrity rumors using narration from an A.I. voice, but also promoted the baseless claim that Mr. Obama is gay and the conspiracy theory that Oprah Winfrey is involved in the slave trade. The channels had collectively received hundreds of millions of views and comments that suggested some viewers believed the claims.