. An ombudsman’s report on the roll out of Centrelink’s automated debt recovery service has identified multiple failures that placed unreasonable burdens on welfare recipients and staff.

The self-initiated investigation was announced in January after months of complaints that the problem-riddled system was sending incorrect debt notices to people.

“The [Online Compliance Intervention] project effectively shifted complex fact finding and data entry functions from the department to the individual and its success relied on its usability,” said the report by acting commonwealth ombudsman, Richard Glenn.

In July 2016 the Department of Human Services switched to an automated system of data-matching to identify welfare fraud.

Glenn found the switch did not see an increase in the 20% rate of people who were sent debt notices but then found not to owe a debt, and it was “entirely reasonable and appropriate” for the department to ask customers to explain discrepancies.

However, this was only as long as the system had complete and accurate information, it said, and the department’s processes placed a greater emphasis on the customer’s responsibility, which was “not reasonable or fair” in many situations.

The department’s requirement for people to keep records for six or seven years was not reasonable, the report found, “particularly when they have not been forewarned about this requirement”.

“Customers do not have the same information gathering powers as DHS.”

The report also highlighted a litany of other issues related to planning, implementation, consultation, expectations of welfare recipients and staff, and a lack of understanding and communication about the new system’s complicated nature.

While it was inevitable there would be issues when rolling out “a large scale, complex automated system in a short timeframe”, the department failed to properly mitigate risks during transition or consult adequately in the planning processes.

“DHS did not clearly communicate aspects of the system to its customers and staff, which led to confusion and misunderstanding.”

The ombudsman acknowledged improvements already made by the department but said there was more needed.

The report identified key issues including:

The accuracy of debts raised, in particular those that were calculated using “averaged” income data.

The 10% recovery fee.

The transparency and usability of the OCI system.

The problems faced by customers when gathering evidence and presenting their case.

The adequacy of the department’s assistance and communication with customers.

The adequacy of staff training and communication to support customers using the system.

The department’s approach to complaints.

The adequacy of the department’s project planning and governance mechanisms.

Among its findings, the report said the department’s initial letters to welfare recipients were “unclear and deficient in many respects” and left out crucial information, including that their income would be averaged out if they didn’t enter it each fortnight.

The letters were also missing contact numbers for the compliance team, which led people to call the general line and face long wait times and unprepared staff who often did not know how the system worked.

The 21-day timeframe to respond to the initial letter was also not reasonable or fair in all circumstances.

The ombudsman’s reports concluded the implementation problems could have been mitigated with better planning and risk management, including user testing, a more incremental roll out and better communication with staff and stakeholders.

The federal government has stridently defended the debt recovery system, including going so far as to release personal details about a welfare recipient to media in order to publicly rebut complaints.

The human services minister, Alan Tudge, said the government welcomed the report and accepted all recommendations.

In a statement, Tudge repeatedly noted the parts of the report that defended the automated system and said the government was already making improvements that, in some cases, went further than what was suggested by the ombudsman.

“The unfortunate reality is that while most welfare recipients do the right thing, some deliberately defraud the system while others inadvertently fail to accurately declare their income and consequently receive an overpayment,” he said.

“We want to be fair and reasonable to welfare recipient but also fair to the taxpayer who pays for the welfare payments.”

The shadow human services minister, Linda Burney, said the report raised “serious questions about Alan Tudge’s oversight of his department”.

“While some changes have been made to Tudge’s robo-debt system, the ombudsman is clear they don’t go far enough,” she said. “The minister has no one to blame but himself. According to the ombudsman, all of these issues could have been avoided with proper planning and consultation.”

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said Labor maintained the system should be suspended for a review.. Inflation has continued to slow, but not as much as the market had expected, likely delaying when the Reserve Bank will be able to pass down an interest rate cut.

national 3:37pm Apr 24, 2024. . Centrelink failed to communicate properly with welfare recipients, their staff lacked training and its so-called 'robo-debt' program placed "unreasonable" expectations on claimants and should have been more rigorously tested.

Those are the findings of the Commonwealth Ombudsman's investigation into the Centrelink debt recovery scandal which saw thousands of people "terrified" over debt notices often totalling many thousands of dollars.

Advertisement

Since Centrelink's debt recovery system was automated in July last year, thousands of clients have spent many hours and days disputing debts they did not actually owe -- like this man, who spent 30 hours disputing his daughter's Centrelink debt, which was consequently amended from $5,500 to $0.

Now, the Ombudsman wants a "comprehensive evaluation" of the automated program before it is rolled out any further.

#Centrelink's debt recovery system lacks transparency and too difficult to use, ombudsman finds https://t.co/deaVKY4boK — ABC News (@abcnews) April 10, 2017

"We found there were issues with the usability and transparency of the system," Acting Commonwealth Ombudsman Richard Glenn said.

Advertisement

Since the investigation began in January, the Department of Human Services has made many positive changes to make the system clearer and easier to use, but "more improvements are needed to ensure the system reflects good public administration," the Ombudsman said.

But the overall accuracy of the debt assessment program was the same and the widely reported "error" rate of debt notices being sent incorrectly was a misrepresentation, the 113-page report found.

The number of times no debts were found following an initial "request for information" letter was 20 percent before the system was automated and did not increase following the automation, the Ombudsman found.

The time frame to respond to the request (21 days), on the other hand, was "not reasonable or fair" in many cases, "given the complexity of collecting historical employment information or the possibility that the customer may not have received the initial letter".

This is not reasonable or fair in situations where customers have to collect evidence from several years ago"

In February, the deadline was extended to 28 days, with options to apply for extensions, following recommendations from the investigation and complaints from welfare recipients.

The short time frame meant that people were forced to repay debt they didn't believe they owed, because they couldn't successfully dispute the debt before the three week deadline.

"The most harrowing part was being told that even though I've got only three weeks left to pay back the debt, the review takes six weeks and that I need to start paying it back in the meantime," Sydney man Brett told The Huffington Post Australia.

The federal watchdog also slammed the Department of Human Services (DHS) for putting too much onus on people to verify their earnings -- sometimes for up to six or seven years.

"This is not reasonable or fair in situations where customers have to collect evidence from several years ago, or where the customer does not have the capacity to obtain the evidence," the report reads.

Advertisement

"Customers do not have the same information gathering powers as DHS."

ANDREW MEARES/FAIRFAX Kathryn Campbell Secretary Department of Human Services before a Senate Committee hearing into the Centrelink robo-debt collection in Canberra.

The DHS should use its powers to collect information directly from employers to verify the customer's earnings, the report stated.

Centrelink should also consider paying back the ten per cent "debt recovery fee" which was automatically applied to debts when the automated system was introduced -- and which the Human Services Minister Alan Tudge was reportedly himself unaware of when questioned by journalists in December.

The report criticised the initial debt letters sent to customers as "unclear", blaming a failure to include the correct phone number (and the difficulty locating the phone number on the Department's website) on the long wait times Centrelink's main phone line experienced.

This resulted in 28 million calls to Centrelink getting a busy signal in the past year, with some customers calling hundreds of times before getting through.

Advertisement

The dedicated 1800 compliance helpline number has since been added to the initial contact letters, the report noted.

But the review has further recommended that the letters mention the possibility of debt earlier, clearly explain how to log earnings so the correct debt will be calculated, and explain to clients that they are able to apply for an extension for their debts.

The Department of Human Services has agreed to implement all of the federal watchdog's recommendations. The Ombudsman Richard Glenn said he would "continue to work closely" with the Department to monitor their implementation of the recommendations.. First Name

Last Name

Email: *

Post Code*

Subscribe to our email bulletins:

Pro Bono Careers | Purpose-driven job alerts & career news. Sent every Monday and Friday morning.

Get purpose-driven roles delivered straight to your inbox. Accompanied by the latest careers news, including Changemakers and who’s moving where in the sector, you’ll never be out of touch with career developments within the sector.

Pro Bono Resources | Sector specific professional tools & webinar updates. Sent once a week.

Get notifications on the latest webinar topics, as well as other Pro Bono Australia professional development resources.. The Turnbull government has admitted it issued robo-debt recovery notices to 20,000 welfare recipients who were later found to owe less or even nothing.

Documents presented to Parliament by Human Services Minister Alan Tudge showed the use of automated data matching processes by Centrelink and the Department of Human Services resulted in 19,980 debt notices being issued, all of which were either reduced or rescinded.

20,000 wrong debts: Human Services Minister Alan Tudge. Credit: Andrew Meares

Data to March 31 showed a total of 12,524 people had their robo-debt demands reduced to a smaller amount, while a further 7456 people were found to have no legitimate debt.

In a response to questions from Labor backbencher Steve Georganas, Mr Tudge said NSW had the most debts reduced to zero, with 2234, while another 3644 debts in the state were reduced.. . . Although the Government asserts that it has reclaimed $300 million in debts owed by welfare recipients, it refuses to disclose exactly how much money it has recovered.

Launched in July 2016, the automated debt compliance system has been the subject of much scrutiny from its inception. Since human oversight has been removed from the recovery process it has been plagued by errors, which have resulted in thousands of Australians receiving incorrect debt notices for money they don’t owe.

The Government has repeatedly stuck by its flawed system, claiming that it has recovered $300 million worth of Centrelink overpayments. When the Department of Human Services (DHS) was asked exactly how much debt has been reclaimed, it was unable to provide an estimate.

The $300 million said to have been reclaimed is the amount of debt that has been identified by the Government – not the amount actually recovered.

Typically, amounts recovered add up to roughly half of that which is identified. For example, in the last financial year, the Government identified $2.8 billion in money owed, but only $1.54 billion was recovered.

Human Services Minister Alan Tudge is still defending the system, despite his admission that the program has some flaws. Labor has called for the system to be suspended while an investigation into its efficacy and accuracy continues, to which Mr Tudge replied: “… frankly, I don’t think many taxpayers would support that call”.

Thousands of Australians have been wrongly assigned debt notices and, subsequently, harassed by debt collectors and threatened with jail time for not resolving the issue within 28 days. This is despite the DHS admitting that the dispute process takes around three weeks longer than the time assigned to repay any debts owed.

“The time taken to finalise a formal review depends on the complexity of the individual case. For the financial year to date, the average time to finalise a review in relation [to] debt decision was 49 days,” stated Department of Human Services General Manager, Hank Jongen.

Amid these complaints and errors, do you think the Government should declare how much money it has actually recovered? Do you think the Government is right to defend its debt-recovery system by using false figures? Is it time the Government admitted defeat and cleaned up the robo-debt system?

Related articles:

Centrelink to target age pensioners

Centrelink system flaws were known

Centrelink debacle hits thousands. At least 20,000 Centrelink debts were either wiped or reduced in a nine-month period, newly released figures show.



The data, tabled in parliament this week, confirms what was already known about extent of problems with the so-called “robo debt” system.

It shows 7,456 debts were reduced to zero and another 12,524 were partially reduced but not wiped entirely, between July last year and March.

For the first time, the data gives a geographic understanding of where debts were issued. It shows high numbers of inaccurate debts in areas of western Sydney, Bundaberg, Mackay, Toowoomba, the New South Wales central coast and around Cranbourne in Melbourne’s south-eastern fringes.

Outer suburbs of the Gold Coast, Hervey Bay and Ipswich in Queensland were also listed in the top 20, as were Ballarat and Werribee in Victoria.

But lawyers have warned the statistics do not give a complete picture. The data only reflects debts where a review or appeal took place.

Victoria Legal Aid’s executive director of civil justice, Dan Nicholson, said the most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups were less likely to have appealed.

“I think on the face of it, it’s a shocking number of wrong debts to be alleged but in fact the most concerning thing is the very large number of people who would not have challenged their debts, and would now be paying back debts that were wrongly or unlawfully raised against them,” Nicholson said.

“We know those people are most likely to be the most disadvantaged in the community, and therefore the people that it may affect the most.”

The human services minister, Alan Tudge, has insisted the system is capable of calculating debts fairly. He pointed to to the ombudsman’s report earlier this year, which made a string of criticisms of the system but found it was able to accurately raise a debt, so long as it was provided with the proper information.

“Of course, if someone provides new accurate information, then a different debt figure is calculated. This has always been the case,” Tudge said. “The percentage of online compliance system debts subsequently reduced to zero after the welfare recipient has provided further information is almost identical to under the old manual system – about 3%.”

Criticism of the system began just before Christmas last year. From July last year, the government introduced a new way of clawing back debts from welfare recipients.

It removed a layer of human oversight from an automated data matching process, which compares an individual’s tax records with the earnings they have reported to Centrelink.

Where previously compliance teams would manually check discrepancies in tax and Centrelink records, the new system immediately sent a letter to the welfare recipient.

That shifted the onus to disproving the debt on to vulnerable Australians. It also allowed the government to significantly ramp up the scale of its debt recovery program.

It shifted people to use a new online tool to prove their entitlement to welfare, often forcing people to find payslips that were up to six years old.

Thousands of letters were sent to the wrong address. Others were either ignored or not understood.

If no response was received, a debt was raised against the individual. A longer period of non-response would see the debt referred to an external debt collector.

“The [online compliance intervention] project effectively shifted complex fact-finding and data entry functions from the department to the individual and its success relied on its usability,” the ombudsman’s report found earlier this year.

The process also led to flaws in the calculation method.

If no response was received, Centrelink would use an “income averaging” method to calculate the debt.

The method takes an individual’s annual income and averages it over Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly reporting periods, thereby assuming an individual had worked for the entire year and was ineligible for welfare.

“The obligation on Centrelink is not to raise a debt unless it is satisfied it exists in the relevant amount,” Nicholson said. “Its job is to use its powers fairly and accurately, not to go on a fishing expedition and expect people to do hours work to correct Centrelink’s basic mistakes.

“We think there are real doubts about the lawfulness of the approach they have used.”

In a joint statement, the shadow human services minister, Linda Burney, and the Labor MP Steven Georganas called on Tudge to apologise to the 20,000 individuals.

“These are absolutely shocking results and reveal the extent to which Mr Tudge has fudged the management of the robo-debt debacle,” they said. “Minister Tudge made them feel frightened, anxious and like criminals, and he should apologise.”. In a bid to recoup $800 million of debt, former welfare recipients who owe money to the federal government will face a travel ban until the funds are repaid.

So far 20 orders have been issued according to human services minister, Michael Keenan who says that over 150,000 people who no longer receive welfare owe money.

“If you received a payment you were not entitled to, you have an obligation to repay the money you owe and we will use every tool at our disposal to ensure it is recovered,” Mr Keenan said in a statement on Saturday 22 September.

Along with the travel ban, those who refuse to pay back their debt will also be charged interest. The rate at which they will have to make repayments will take into consideration each person’s circumstances, while those who are facing hardship have the chance to defer their returns.

The minister clarified that those who are currently receiving welfare, or who are making repayments towards their debt would not be impacted by the travel ban. Instead its focus is those with large debts consistently refusing to pay the money back.

“It’s very important people repay money to the Australian taxpayer,” said Mr Keenan.

“The money that funds the welfare system has been earned by hardworking Australians and they expect us to make sure that system operates with integrity, that people get the support that they need and that they’re not getting more out of the system than they’re entitled to.”

Labor’s shadow health spokesperson, Catherine King said more information was required on the matter. Referring to Centrelink’s robo-debt scandal, which saw some 20,000 people sent notices in 2017 falsely claiming they owed money to the government, she urged the government to tread very carefully.

“We had the robo-debt scandal where people in fact did not have debts at all and were absolutely hounded by this government,” said Ms King.

“The government would want to be very, very careful that it knows absolutely that these people do have debts, that this isn’t another debacle in the making.”. A Senate inquiry has called for Centrelink’s controversial automated debt recovery system to be suspended until its many flaws can be resolved.

The inquiry released its report on Wednesday night, which made 21 recommendations for fixing the robo-debt system.

The inquiry has urged all debts calculated using the error-prone “income averaging” process to be reassessed. It also called for a redesign of the system with a robust risk assessment process.

Horror stories have continued to emerge about false debts imposed by the system, despite the government announcing a series of changes earlier this year.



One man, who asked to remain anonymous, said he fought for months to force Centrelink to concede it had issued him a $4,000 debt in error. He said he suffers depression and became suicidal during the ordeal.

The department agreed he owed nothing in December, but sent him another debt letter in early April, again demanding payment of the debt.

That meant he had to begin the dispute all over again. His second fight against Centrelink ended in mid-May, after the department again conceded that he owed them nothing.

“This time hasn’t been quite as bad, it’s just sort of made me angry,” he told Guardian Australia. “The first time around it was just making me suicidal, I have depression, and I’ve worked through that with my therapist.”

“I’m working on a PhD. As you can probably imagine, doing that I don’t have much money.”

Correspondence between the man and Centrelink supports this version of events.

The inquiry began hearings in March, and its chair, Greens senator Rachel Siewert, said it had exposed serious flaws in the system.

“The evidence presented to the committee as it travelled across the country was compelling, consistent, and showed a program that was putting huge pressure on some of the most vulnerable members of our community,” Siewert said after the report’s release.

“Procedural fairness is lacking in every stage of the robo-debt program; whether it be the forcing of people to reach back through their paperwork from six years ago, sending debt letters to the wrong address and/or not engaging with concerned recipients, or averaging out of income data, often producing incorrect results.”

The Department of Human Services used the inquiry to highlight the changes it had made to the system, which it said had largely resolved the problems. But others say the changes don’t go far enough.

The Australian Council of Social Service chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said on Wednesday said the system is unworkable and must be abolished.

“Since its adoption 12 months ago, robo-debt has issued thousands of debt notices in error to parents, people with disabilities, carers and those seeking paid work, resulting in people slapped with Centrelink debts they do not owe or debts higher than what they owe,” Goldie said. “It has been a devastating abuse of government power that has caused extensive harm, particularly among people who are the most vulnerable in our community,” she said.

Anglicare Australia released a similar statement on Wednesday, saying the system has unfairly shifted the onus of disproving debts onto vulnerable Australians.

Its executive director, Kasy Chambers, urged the government to pay heed to the significant evidence the inquiry heard about the hardship caused by the system.

“The shift in the onus of proof onto recipients, the barriers to people trying to fix these problems through the Centrelink system, and the growing stigmatisation of welfare, is a step towards the criminalisation of poverty and disadvantage,” Chambers said.

“Let’s suspend this failing system and work together to design one that works for people – not just the government,” she said.



The system was introduced in July but began in earnest in September, and issued about 220,000 letters in the five months to February.



Almost half of the debts raised between July and March were referred to private debt collectors.

The system was quickly beset by complaints from vulnerable Australians, who said they were lumped with inaccurate debts, but struggled to get help through Centrelink’s overloaded phone system or its new online portal.



The system removed a key layer of human oversight and placed greater reliance on a process of data matching, which automatically compared Centrelink and tax office records to detect discrepancies in reported income.

Where a discrepancy in the two income records was detected, letters are automatically generated and sent demanding explanations from welfare recipients.

If no reply was received, the department used an error-prone process of “income averaging” that crudely divided a person’s yearly income by 26 fortnights, and assumed they were working for the entire year.

Letters were sent to thousands of old addresses, and many who did receive them were unable to explain the discrepancy or found it impossible to obtain years-old documentation to prove their income from past employers.

Others simply assumed the government was correct, accepted the income information, and paid the debt without question.

Some welfare recipients became confused by the new online portal that they were to use to check and dispute the discrepancy.

Progressive activist group, GetUp, urged the government to adopt the inquiry’s recommendations in full.



GetUp’s economic fairness campaigns director, Natalie O’Brien, expressed concern about the debt recovery scheme’s reported focus on pensioners from 1 July.

“It’s clear that their robo-debt threat disaster has caused immeasurable harm in the community,” O’Brien said. “Now they want to inflict this harm on pensioners across the country.”. The head of the Department of Human Services has blamed the “robo debt” scandal largely on welfare recipients’ failure to engage with Centrelink.

The Senate inquiry into Centrelink’s “robo-debt” system began on Wednesday, hearing from the community sector, the community and public sector union, tax office officials and the secretary of the Department of Human Services, Kathryn Campbell.

Critics of the system say its many flaws have combined to create a debt recovery process that is unfair, inaccurate and inhumane.

The inquiry heard that the system has only recovered $24m so far, although it has raised, or identified, $300m. It sent 217,403 letters between July and December demanding explanations from welfare recipients, 36,305 of which did not result in a debt.

The system raised 133,282 debts, 12,733 of which were either reduced to zero, reduced, or written off or waived.

The system, which began last year, places a greater reliance on data matching to detect discrepancies between income reported to Centrelink and the Australian Taxation Office.



It removes human oversight over that data-matching process and allows it to automatically generate letters demanding an explanation from welfare recipients.

If no response is received, the debt is automatically imposed, often using a crude calculation that averages an individual’s annual income over Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly reporting periods. More than 6,500 of the initial letters were sent to wrong addresses.

Centrelink was relying on addresses it held on its own records, not the electoral roll, to target people who had stopped receiving benefits years ago.

Campbell blamed the problems with the system on a failure of welfare recipients to engage with those letters or other communications from the department.



“I think what we underestimated was how many people would not clarify, and would not engage, and so I think if I was to sum up what the problem has been it is that, when we wrote those initial letters, that recipients and former recipients didn’t engage,” Campbell said.

“Now a small part of that, 6,600, was because they didn’t know anything about it. But there was a large proportion of people who didn’t engage with us through those initial letters.”



Campbell said a pilot of the program conducted early last year did not suggest that was likely to be a problem.

Centrelink, in changes announced last month, now uses registered post to ensure the letters are being received.

Campbell also said media reporting of the “robo debt” system in the lead-up to Christmas had caused distress to individuals and led them to believe they had been wrongly targeted.

Earlier, tax office officials said they were not approached by the Department of Human Services over the new system before it was launched.

The tax office asked the department whether it could help with the system in December, when problems began to publicly emerge, but was rebuffed. It later met with the department in February.

It sought to distance itself from the robo debt program, saying it only supplied the data to Centrelink and helped to match it.

The tax office’s deputy commissioner for debt, Robert Ravanello, said it was not the agency’s place to comment on how Centrelink then uses its data.

“We are required to provide the data, which we’ve done, how DHS uses that data and matches it and converts annual to fortnightly … I think is really better asked of DHS.”

Earlier, the Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss) said it feared the system’s treatment of welfare recipients was scaring individuals away from exercising their right to claim income support.

Acoss described the system as an abuse of government power that was undermining confidence in public administration.

The director of the ACT Council of Social Service, Susan Helyar, said cynics believed that may have been the government’s intent.

“All of these things compromise the public’s confidence in systems, and some of our members have wondered whether partly what individuals are being encouraged to do is stay out of the welfare system,” Helyar said. “They are being discouraged from exercising their entitlements in the income support system by this poor public administration.

“Some people cynically suggest that might be the point of the process.”



“I just think it’s really dangerous for the government to implement programs in a way that is so flawed because it has long term impacts on the public’s confidence.”



Those comments were echoed by the chief executive of Acoss, Cassandra Goldie, who said public confidence in the social security system had been undermined.

Goldie said Centrelink should be creating an environment of support and help for the nation’s most vulnerable.

“It is really important to understand the power dynamic here,” Goldie said. “The Department of Human Services plays such a critical, powerful role in Australian society. We call it a safety net, let’s not forget the importance of that.



“What this system has done is create a climate where people have been frightened, indeed people have been bullied, into complying.”

Many reports have emerged of individuals being hit with inaccurate debts, which largely arise from the system’s crude averaging of an individual’s income across a certain time period. That leads the system to assume an individual has worked constantly during the period and was therefore ineligible to claim welfare.



Campbell said that averaging process only occurred when a recipient failed to engage with Centrelink.

Reports have also been received of the system double-counting income when an employer name that has been reported to Centrelink does not match that on tax office records.

Individuals have also faced difficulties using the new online compliance system to correct their details or explain a discrepancy. Changes have now been made to simplify the language and make the system easier to use, Campbell said.

Acoss issued a statement on Wednesday morning, signed by 37 community sector organisations, repeating calls for the system to be shut down. Goldie also wants the government to convene a roundtable with experts to develop a more humane and fair system.

Goldie told the inquiry that she had met with the human services minister, Alan Tudge, once but had otherwise not received replies to correspondence.

“The one outcome from the engagement to date, is as we say, we have met with the department about the next round of technology design [the welfare payment infrastructure transformation],” Goldie said. “But none of the other requests have been responded to.”

Campbell was asked whether she would meet with Acoss. She said she had decided not to previously because the contents of the organisation’s meeting with Tudge had ended up in the media. She said she would need the permission of her minister before meeting with Acoss in the future.

The Community and Public Sector Union, which represents Centrelink workers, also gave evidence to the inquiry on Wednesday morning.

The CPSU national secretary, Nadine Flood, said years of funding cuts and poor policy decisions had reduced the department’s ability to act as a cornerstone of the welfare system and Australian society.

The department has lost 4776 full time equivalent positions since 2010-11.

Flood said 36m calls to Centrelink went unanswered last year. She said staff were reporting an increased level of client distress and frustration.

“What we see currently is a very human price being paid, both by clients … and the people who work for the department themselves,” Flood said. “It is not an exaggeration to say that the Department of Human Services is an agency in crisis, and it’s not something I say lightly,” she said.

Flood said she felt that staff and delegates could not give evidence to the inquiry because of the current climate within the department. She said staff reported having their emails and social media monitored by the department, including emails from work accounts to Cpsu addresses.

The inquiry’s chair, the Greens senator Rachel Siewert, said the evidence on Wednesday morning showed how serious the impact of the system had been. She said Acoss’s evidence showed how the system had reversed the onus of proof onto the welfare recipients to prove they did not owe a debt.

“Acoss are right in pointing out the absurdity of recipients having to investigate their own debt and prove their innocence,” Siewert said. “That job belongs to the department, the department should clearly point out the nature and details of the debt.”

The CPSU had also requested a briefing from the department secretary, Kathryn Campbell. The deputy national president of the CPSU, Lisa Newman, said those requests had been rejected.

Witnesses from the Department of Human Services are expected to give evidence on Wednesday afternoon as the inquiry continues.

. A leading fetal alcohol syndrome researcher and Queensland Australian of the Year finalist has been caught up in the Centrelink debt recovery scandal, after the system wrongly deemed she owed $7,600.

Medical ethnographer Janet Hammill, 76, has spent decades researching the foetal origins of health and disease, and remains with the University of Queensland, where she works voluntarily and lives off the age pension.

Hammill received a $26,000 research grant between July 2011 and April 2012, which she fully reported to Centrelink at the time.

But Centrelink’s automated debt recovery system appears to have averaged the grant across all 26 fortnights of 2012, before deeming her to have been significantly overpaid.

She has struggled to get on to anyone at Centrelink to explain, including using their overloaded phone system and confusing online system.

“You feel so helpless, I mean for heaven’s sakes, you can look through my CV and see that I’m not helpless,” Hammill said.

Janet Hammill. Photograph: australianoftheyear.org.au

“But this puts you into another category of disempowerment. I can just imagine somebody who is not computer literate or is just managing to get by day to day, it’s just been so terribly frustrating,” she said.



“They made me feel as though I’m some sort of cheat, and I haven’t had an income since April 2012.”

Her case comes as the federal government implements changes to attempt to address criticism of its controversial automated debt recovery system.



The human services minister, Alan Tudge, who last week said the system was working as it should, has directed the department to begin including Centrelink’s dedicated 1800 phone number for the compliance team in letters to welfare recipients.

The language in the letters will also be simplified and made clearer, he said.

In cases where Centrelink has sent letters to the wrong address, the government will allow them to have an internal review before they are asked to begin paying back money.

The government will also use other records, such as the electoral roll, to ensure Centrelink’s letters are going to the right address, and will begin using registered mail to ensure the correspondence is received.

In a small number of cases, Centrelink will also call customers to ensure they have received the letters.

“One of the issues has been that on some occasions the address which Centrelink has on file hasn’t been an up-to-date one, and so the first that a person might hear about their debt notice is when there’s a debt collector on their doorstep,” Tudge said on 2GB radio in Sydney on Monday.

“Now we’re fixing that problem by ensuring that we’re going to be using multiple different addresses including a person’s electoral roll address and other addresses to ensure they do get that letter and do get the opportunity to update their record if they do believe, honestly, that they have a valid explanation for why there’s a discrepancy.”

Labor’s Linda Burney has described the changes as a backflip, made after weeks of claiming there was nothing wrong with the system.

Burney issued a statement on Monday questioning whether the next batch of Centrelink’s letters, due to go out this week, will incorporate the changes, and how they would apply to those already affected.

“After weeks of denial the minster has finally admitted what everyone else already knows: there are serious problems with the robo-debt program,” Burney said. “Admitting the stuff-up is only the first step, now he needs to apologise and take action to help those who have been tormented by false debt claims.”

Independent MP Andrew Wilkie said he had been told by several Centrelink staff that the government is failing to properly deal with those left feeling suicidal by the system.

Wilkie said Centrelink staff are supposed to refer those feeling suicidal to social workers, but the level of demand for help has made that near impossible.

He said such cases were instead being referred back to casual Centrelink employees on the agency’s general phone line, who have no training in suicide prevention. Wilkie, who says he has spoken to several Centrelink whistleblowers, has written to the Commonwealth ombudsman detailing the allegations.

He said staff are being given a quota for the retrieval of debts (six to 10 debt notices a day) and discouraged from looking “too closely” at complex cases.



He said he had been told that Centrelink staff are being discouraged from pausing debt repayments in cases of financial hardship.

“The system’s a complete dud and must be fixed or binned,” Wilkie said.



“By knowingly issuing these questionable debt notices and collecting money that turns out not to be owed, this government is stealing from taxpayers,” he said.

But the department of human services have rejected Wilkie’s claims as inaccurate and misleading.

Department general manager for communications, Hank Jongen, said there had been no increase in social work referrals due to the new system.

“Staff are transferring calls to social workers where necessary as per our standard process and we are meeting our service standards,” Jongen said in a statement released on Monday afternoon.

“There have been no procedural issues with social workers being available.”

Jongen said all staff who were reviewing cases had received additional training, and that only skilled staff undertake decision-making.

He said all cases, including complex ones, are appropriately considered. Jongen rejected any notion that staff are given a quota for the raising of debts, and said financial hardship is taken into account.

Jongen also dismissed claims that the system had a 20% error rate.

“Commentary on the department’s online compliance system continues to incorrectly say 20 per cent of letters are being issued in error,” he said.

“This is misleading and a misrepresentation of the process.”. Victoria Legal Aid has described Centrelink’s robo-debt system as an “abject failure” which is an arguably unlawful response to the government’s self-inflicted budget problems.

The scathing assessment came as the system is again put under the microscope, this time by the external auditing firm PwC Australia, which has been engaged by the Department of Human Services.

The Senate inquiry into the automated debt recovery system continued on Tuesday in Melbourne, hearing evidence from Victoria Legal Aid and the state’s community legal centres.

Legal Aid’s managing director, Bevan Warner, said the system should serve as a lesson of what not to do in public administration.

“In our view the initiative is an abject failure, it’s hurting people,” Warner said. “It is arguably unlawful, and even if it is lawful, it shouldn’t be. The minor improvements that have been announced do not go far enough.”

Warner said the legality of the system was questionable because the creation of the debts did not involve a critical evaluation by a Centrelink officer.

The system is expected to begin to target 783,000 people for possible debts in 2016-17, compared with 20,000 in the years earlier.

“This is an unjustified and staggering 3,900% increase,” Warner said. “The initiative was a blunt solution to a self-inflicted problem.”

Warner called on the government to release the terms of reference of the PwC audit, and involve community-sector stakeholders in the process to rebuild confidence in Centrelink’s debt recovery process.

Earlier, the Department of Human Services was questioned about whether it had audited debts it had already raised through the error-prone process of income averaging, to make sure they were accurate.

The department’s whole of government division general manager, Marc Mowbray-d’Arbela, could not answer.

But he said the accuracy of the debts was taken at “face value” once a recipient began paying them back.

“The information we have and the discrepancy that arose from the information of the ATO has led to an interaction [with the customer], and if the customer has accepted that and started paying it back, we take that at face value,” Mowbray-d’Arbela said.



The inquiry also heard from the Melbourne-based Consumer Action Law and Western Community Legal centres. They argued that Centrelink should be bound by the same stringent guidelines that govern private external debt collectors.



Those guidelines – produced by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the Australian Securities and Investment Commission – prevent undue harassment, intimidation or unscrupulous practices, and requires private debt collectors to have evidence that a debt exists before they attempt to recover money.

The guidelines now apply to the third-party debt collectors engaged by Centrelink but not Centrelink itself.

Consumer Action Law Centre’s chief executive, Gerard Brodie, called on Centrelink to voluntarily ask the ACCC/Asic to hold it to the guidelines.

Brodie said that would force the agency to provide evidence to back up its allegation that a debt existswhen it is disputed by the welfare recipient.

“We think the guidelines, as they stand, are very strong,” Brodie said. “If they applied to Centrelink as well as private enterprise, that would be a significant step forward,” he said.

Western Community Legal Centre’s chief executive, Denis Nelthorpe, said the level of legal assistance available to welfare recipients was extremely limited. Only a handful of lawyers in the country had specialised knowledge in the area,” he said.

“If you receive one of these letters, your chances of seeing someone and getting advice is somewhere between limited and non-existent,” Nelthorpe said.

On Monday Australia’s ombudsman released the results of a three-month investigation of the system.

The acting commonwealth ombudsman, Richard Glenn, found the system was capable of accurately calculating debts if provided with accurate information, and said it was reasonable to use data-matching to identify discrepancies in reported income.

But he also found a litany of flaws in the system’s design, saying it placed an often unreasonable burden on welfare recipients to provide the information needed to disprove debts.

Glenn found no modelling had been done to determine how many debts would be over-calculated. He found initial letters sent to welfare recipients failed to include crucial information, and that the online portal was unusable and confusing for some.

He recommended that the 10% debt recovery fee, which has been indiscriminately applied until recently, should be reconsidered. And he said vulnerable recipients should get better support from the department.

The report raised concerns about the Department of Human Services’ assistance and communication with customers, the adequacy of staff training and communication to support customers using the system, its approach to complaints, and the adequacy of its project planning and governance mechanisms.



It found the flaws with the system could have largely been avoided with better planning and user testing, a slower rollout, and better communication with stakeholders.

The government has accepted the ombudsman’s eight recommendations.

The human services minister, Alan Tudge, said the report showed the approach was reasonable and proper, and that the system was accurately calculating debts on the basis of information it had at the time.. More than one third of Centrelink welfare debt recovery cases that are appealed to the independent tribunal are overturned.

The Administrative Appeals Tribunal has set aside 960 Centrelink debt decisions out of 2,699 appeals lodged between March 2016 and March 2017, while a further 132 were “varied”.

The majority of the decisions are likely too early to relate to the government’s controversial “robo debt” measure but Guardian Australia understands tribunal members are concerned about the looming workload caused by the government’s use of the automated system.

“There’s a lag time there with the robo debts specifically … you’re looking at a minimum of six to eight months [until they appear in the tribunal],” one tribunal source said. “We’re all suspecting that there is going to be some kind surge but it hasn’t come through yet.”

The automated debt recovery system has drawn criticism from welfare organisations and is subject to an ongoing Senate inquiry.

The figures were obtained under freedom-of-information laws from the AAT. A decision by Centrelink can be “set aside” for a number of different reasons. An analysis of published AAT decisions shows that this can include incorrectly calculating debts, as well as waiving debts on the grounds that they would cause the Centrelink recipient serious financial hardship.

A “varied” decision can also mean that part of the debt was waived, set aside or incorrectly calculated. The data shows a steady rise in decisions from January 2017.

In 2015-16, the number of all Centrelink matters – not just debt decisions – set aside or varied by the tribunal was 22%.

The National Social Security Rights Network said the high rate at which the tribunal was setting aside or varying debt decisions was surprising.

The network’s executive officer, Matthew Butt, said the complexity of the welfare system meant errors were to be expected but said Centrelink must do more to ensure people understood debt decisions and were given the information needed to quickly assess their accuracy and fairness.

“More generally the data shows the importance of free, accessible appeal rights,” Butt said. “Although a majority of Centrelink decisions are affirmed on appeal, a significant proportion are changed or set aside entirely. In many cases this is to the benefit of the individual.”

The Australian Council of Social Service’s chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said the figures further underlined the need for human involvement in debt decisions.

“We do not know how many of these were robo debt cases but our firm view is that, without human involvement in the detection and calculation of debts, mistakes will be made and there is a high risk that people will pay debts they do not owe,” Goldie said.

“The government must only issue a debt notice if it has solid proof that a debt exists and that it is accurate. This is not the case under the robo debt program and is why it must be stopped immediately.”

Figures cited by the Department of Human Services during the Senate inquiry suggest only a small amount of tribunal cases so far relate to the automated debt notices. For the 2016-17 financial year, as at 28 February 2017, 106 people have lodged an application at the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a review of an Online Compliance Intervention decision.

Under social security law, a welfare recipient who receives a debt notice has 13 weeks to seek a review of the decision internally. If they are still unhappy with this decision they are then able to challenge it in the first tier of the AAT’s social security division.

These hearings are held confidentially and are often informal in order to expedite cases. Some hearings can be public in the event they are appealed to the second tier of the AAT review system.. Centrelink has insisted it has no plans to use the automated debt recovery system to target aged pensioners from next week, despite concerns from Labor and some community groups.

From Saturday, Centrelink will expand its data-matching program, which it uses to compare an individual’s reported income to records held by the tax office.

Centrelink will now begin using data-matching to consider whether a person’s earnings from trusts or family daycare make them ineligible for welfare.

It will also continue to use data-matching to scrutinise a person’s earnings from assets and investments, a measure it hopes will save $980m over three years. But crucially, the department says it will still use humans to manually review discrepancies involving non-employment income.

That sets it apart from the robo-debt system, which automatically begins a debt retrieval process whenever a discrepancy in income is detected through data-matching.

The lack of human oversight was the cause of a significant amount of the criticism of robo-debt.

The departmental spokesman, general manager Hank Jongen, said individuals targeted for non-employment income types would liaise with the department on a specialised 1800 number.

They would not use Centrelink’s online compliance portal, he said.

“The Department of Human Services will not be expanding the current online compliance system from 1 July to include older Australians who have earned income from their assets or investments,” Jongen said.



“The current online system only checks salary and wage income and will continue to be available for salary and wage earners who find this channel the most convenient to complete a review,” he said.



An inquiry into the robo-debt system had raised concerns that it would be expanded to target aged pensioners. Those concerns had been echoed by Labor and others.

Jongen said the expansion of the compliance system from July 1 was aimed at scrutinising earnings from family daycare and trusts. He said few aged pensioners were expected to be earning from those income streams.

“From early July, the department will expand its compliance reviews of income from family daycare and trusts,” she said.

“The department does not expect many pensioners to initially be subject to these expanded measures, due to the nature of the income being reviewed.

“Departmental compliance officers manually review these other forms of income earned.”

The expansion of data-matching was one of a suite of measures announced in last year’s midyear economic and fiscal outlook, which collectively are designed to save $2.1bn over the forward estimates.

Meanwhile, there are conflicting reports about a significant change in staffing at Centrelink, which the union has claimed as a victory.

The Community and Public Sector Union said the department was planning to turn casual roles into 2,000 permanent jobs, mainly in the agency’s troubled call centres.

The national secretary, Nadine Flood, said it would help relieve pressure on an agency that has sustained repeated cuts in recent years – and help end unacceptable waiting times for phone calls to Centrelink.



“People employed casually by DHS already make a valuable contribution, but giving them permanent jobs will mean they receive the comprehensive training that is required to fully help customers through sensitive issues and often complex processes,” Flood said.



“The department deserves congratulations for taking this first step to turn around what has been an unacceptable slide in service standards.”

But the department has offered a different recruitment figure.

It says it is only recruiting for about 107 roles. A spokeswoman said that was part of “normal business processes”.

The department said it was also looking to “rebalance its staffing profile including ongoing employment”.

“Based on our current staffing levels, and forecast turnover, the department is currently in the process of conducting recruitment of some 107 roles,” she said.

“Further advertising of positions will be dependent on staff turnover and business needs.”

The news comes as the auditor general, Grant Hehir, rejected calls for a specific audit of the debt recovery system. The independent MP Andrew Wilkie made the request last month, but Hehir said the Commonwealth Ombudsman had already considered the system comprehensively.

But he said the issues raised with the debt recovery system may be considered as part of a broader audit of welfare compliance measures in the coming year.

Labor and the CPSU have both sought to characterise Centrelink as an agency in crisis, particularly since problems with its debt recovery system began to emerge late last year.

The agency has shed thousands of jobs in recent years. That includes a reduction in average staffing levels of 4,776 between 2010-11 to 2015-16.

The CPSU said the debt recovery scandal was exacerbated by the pressure on the agency’s resources.

Flood said she expected the permanent roles to provide clear benefits to the department in terms of service delivery.

“DHS has been described as an agency in crisis,” Flood said.“These jobs will help repair that damage, while the department also needs to agree a fair and reasonable outcome to resolve enterprise bargaining and implement the key recommendations of last week’s inquiry report into robo-debt.”

The spokeswoman for DHS said casual and non-ongoing staff would have to apply for the new roles and be considered on merit.. Privacy campaigners say Centrelink’s use of data-matching to detect potential welfare debts has failed to meet the government’s own privacy guidelines.

The Senate inquiry into the “robo debt” debacle continued on Wednesday, hearing from privacy advocates and New South Wales-based welfare advocacy groups.

The Australian Privacy Foundation used its evidence to raise a series of concerns about the way Centrelink is now using automated data-matching.

Centrelink has for many years automatically matched its data with that held by the Australian Taxation Office to detect discrepancies in reported income.

Typically, such data-matching programs are required to comply with onerous requirements under the federal privacy and data-matching acts.

But, because Centrelink is no longer using tax file numbers to match data with the ATO, it only has to follow a less onerous voluntary set of guidelines, issued by the office of the Australian information commissioner.

Those guidelines require the government to publicly release a protocol for how the data-matching will work and what information will be used.

They also require the government to provide proper notice to the public of its data-matching activity and give individuals a chance to respond.

The Australian Privacy Foundation chairwoman, Kat Lane, said there was no evidence that Centrelink had complied with obligations of those guidelines.

“I can’t see any evidence that Centrelink did any of it, not one bit,” Lane said. “I can only come to the conclusion that they just simply decided, because [the guidelines] were voluntary, that somehow they didn’t apply to them, even though they were issued by a government regulator.

“To get to a situation where you have voluntary guidelines issued by a regulator that the government simply chooses to ignore is extremely disturbing.”

The evidence came after the Nick Xenophon Team senator Skye Kakoschke-Moore wrote to the information commissioner, Timothy Pilgrim, to voice her concerns about the same apparent privacy breaches.

Pilgrim is still considering whether to launch an investigation into the privacy implications of the robo debt system.

Kakoschke-Moore said the evidence made it clear an overhaul of Australia’s privacy laws was needed.

“The privacy landscape the Department of Human Services is operating in with this debt recovery process can only be described as the wild west where the rules are voluntary and the sheriff is armed with a wet newspaper,” Kakoschke-Moore said.

“By not using a person’s TFN in the debt calculation process, the DHS has effectively removed themselves from the protections and requirements provided by the data-matching act.

“Not only that but they haven’t even seen fit to comply with the watered down provisions of the government’s own voluntary data-matching guidelines.”

One of the external debt collectors contracted by Centrelink, the Probe Group, also gave evidence on Wednesday. Probe’s chief operations officer, Jarrod Kagan, confirmed the department was paying it on a commission basis.

That differs from other agencies, like the Australian Taxation Office, which use a flat fee to pay external debt collectors. Kagan would not specify the exact commissions his company was paid to collect Centrelink debts.

He denied allegations that his staff had harassed welfare recipients, or threatened to confiscate their property.

Later on Wednesday, the acting Commonwealth Ombudsman, Richard Glenn, told the inquiry that the system wasn’t working well when he began his investigation.

Glenn said his office had received 377 complaints about the robo debt system since November. He had received 877 complaints about debt or letters involving Centrelink more generally.

He said the recommendations contained in his report, if implemented properly, would improve the system.

“The proof of these things is always in the actual implementation. One can make a recommendation and you need to test it in real life, and that’s obviously something we’ll keep a close eye on going forward,” Glenn said.



The ombudsman’s office said there was a lack of consultation with the digital transformation agency, welfare groups, and other government departments. He said the department should have been “better prepared” to help people work out whether they had a debt or not when rolling out the system.

The inquiry heard that, following ombudsman’s advice, the government was now reassessing cases in which a 10% debt recovery fee had been imposed. Welfare rights groups have previously expressed concern that the fee was being imposed indiscriminately and potentially unlawfully.

The inquiry also heard that, from July, Centrelink will begin using the system to consider other income sources, including dividends from shares or rental income.. Centrelink will enlist up to 1,000 staff from labour-hire firms to help it recover debts and enforce the compliance of welfare recipients.

The move has prompted a furious response from the main public sector union, which labelled it yet another example of the government “privatising our safety net”.

But a spokesman for the Department of Human Services (DHS), Hank Jongen, has described it as simply a “temporary surge” in the use of private contractors, a practice that was neither new or unusual.

The large-scale outsourcing exercise comes a month after the government announced 250 staff from multinational outsourcing giant Serco would be used in Centrelink’s call centre, which has struggled to reduce excessive waiting times.

The department is yet to select the labour hire firms but Guardian Australia understands the new staff will begin work in early 2018 within Centrelink’s compliance area.



That area came under immense scrutiny earlier this year, after the “robo-debt” crisis caused the issuing of inaccurate debts to vulnerable and disadvantaged Australians.



The labour-hire staff are designed to supplement DHS’s existing workforce of more than 34,000. It is understood they will be dispersed to offices across the country, and used to free up existing public servants for more complex cases.

The labour-hire staff are also expected to have access to Centrelink systems.

The Community and Public Sector Union (CPSU) national secretary, Nadine Flood, described the outsourcing as “new and scandalous”.

Flood said it would place labour-hire staff in sensitive roles that “should be done by well-trained public servants”.

“Robo-debt was an absolute disaster for both DHS staff and the community – the Turnbull government is trying to abdicate their responsibility for this debacle by outsourcing the mop-up to a private company,” Flood told Guardian Australia.

“Labour hire has no place in public services – the Turnbull government needs to lift its arbitrary cap on public sector employment so that the community can have the services it needs,” she said.

The outsourcing is designed to help achieve recent Coalition budget measures, which sought to crack down on welfare fraud and non-compliance.



Jongen said the government had committed extra resources to help strengthen “the integrity of the welfare system”.



“To meet this commitment, the Department of Human Services has engaged additional workers on a contract basis to support the temporary surge in workload as these measures are implemented,” Jongen said.



“This is not new, the department has engaged contractors over many years for specialist services and to support day-to-day operations to help fill short-term requirements for finite periods.”

The robo-debt scandal, which emerged publicly in early December last year, caused a further deterioration of morale within Centrelink.

Flood warned moves to privatise the compliance area would only cause morale to plummet further.

“DHS staff have an important job that they take pride in and that the whole community relies on,” she said.

“These privatisation moves make these jobs precarious and unnecessarily stressful. Staff are saying that morale has reached rock-bottom and this has real implications for staff and the community.”. The public sector union has condemned moves to privatise Centrelink’s much-criticised call centre, saying it would give Serco access to vast amounts of personal information.

The human services minister, Alan Tudge, announced that a subsidiary of multinational Serco – Serco Citizen Services – would be contracted to help operate Centrelink’s call centre.

Tudge said the move would add 250 staff in a significant boost to the capacity of the call centre. Serco staff would supplement existing workers in the three year pilot program.

Tudge said the Serco workers would comply with all Commonwealth privacy and security requirements.

The announcement is designed to address significant delays with the call centre, a source of constant frustration for social security recipients.

“This partnership will assist Australians who are accessing Centrelink services, and help reduce call wait times,” Tudge said.

The department of human services recorded 42 million “busy signals” between July 2016 and June, according to evidence in Senate estimates.

Average wait times were roughly 28 minutes for the disability, sickness, and carers line, 30 minutes for employment services and 16 minutes for families and parenting. The wait time was worst for the “participation” phone line, at 38 minutes.

In the financial year prior, about 42% of the 68 million calls made to Centrelink were blocked. Another 7.12 million calls were abandoned.

The Community and Public Sector Union quickly criticised the Serco decision as an “absolute disaster”.

The union’s national secretary, Nadine Flood, said it was an attack on public servants, a threat to the integrity of private information and a privatisation that would downgrade the quality of a critical public service.

“We are seeking an urgent meeting with the department seeking more information on this dubious arrangement,” Flood said.

“Clearly this deal has been kept secret for some time if Serco is planning to be hooked into Centrelink’s systems in just a few weeks. Providing Serco with even the most basic access to client records would be giving the company a frightening amount of personal information.”



The government will spend $51.7m over three years to fund Serco’s involvement with the call centre. Tudge said no services or data would go offshore.

Serco is due to begin working in the call centre in coming weeks.



The announcement comes after renewed criticism this week of the government’s response to the “robo debt” scandal, which itself exposed a lack of capacity in Centrelink’s call centre.

The government again stated it had no intention of suspending the automated debt recovery system, which issued at least 20,000 inaccurate debts to Australia’s most vulnerable.

It did so in a formal response to a scathing Senate inquiry report. Labor and the Greens both described the government’s response to the report as an insult.

“The Turnbull government’s refusal to act on the recommendations of the Senate inquiry to overhaul the Online Compliance Intervention program is an insult to the thousands of decent Australians who were caught up in the conservatives robo-debt disaster,” shadow human services minister, Linda Burney, said in a statement.. The Turnbull government’s robo-debt program involves enforcement of “illegal” debts that in some cases are inflated or nonexistent, a former member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal has said.

The scathing indictment of the program is contained in an academic paper by Prof Terry Carney that also accuses Centrelink of failing to defend the legality of debts in the AAT and suggests the tribunal should set aside debts until the agency has proved the amounts are correct.

The criticism has been echoed by the National Social Security Rights Network and the Welfare Rights Centre, which warned cases of false debts were being routinely challenged and reduced or completely wiped in the tribunal.

Carney explained the robo-debt program calculates welfare recipients’ income and averages it over fortnightly periods rather than discovering their actual income for each and every fortnightly period which, he writes, is the proper basis for calculating the debt.

Carney said when Centrelink asks for payment of alleged debts or evidence to disprove them, “most vulnerable alleged debtors will simply throw up their hands, assume Centrelink knows that there really is a debt, and seek to pay it off as quickly as possible”.

He said the welfare agency did this even though a report by the commonwealth ombudsman in April 2017 “demonstrated that most debts calculated this way were greatly inflated, and that some were false (zero debts)”.

Carney was a member of the social services division of the AAT – its longest-serving member until his term concluded in September 2017 – and oversaw the writing of the Social Security Act.

Carney praises the parliamentary community affairs committee for recommending that “Centrelink resume responsibility for obtaining all information necessary for calculating working age payment debts”.

But, he argues, this worthy recommendation still “[fails] to correct the fundamental legal error” in alleging that a debt exists in the first place.

When welfare recipients challenge alleged debts in the AAT, based on his experience as a member of the first tier of the AAT, Carney said “in practice Centrelink fails to refer at all to the legal foundation for debts routinely defended” in hearings.

He accused Centrelink of being “elliptical at best” when asked for written submissions proving a debt and said the agency “appears to have elected not to challenge” adverse robodebt rulings by appealing to the second tier of the AAT.

The Welfare Rights Centre principal solicitor, Katherine Boyle, told Guardian Australia the issues raised in Carney’s article were seen on a daily basis by her organisation.

“We see many examples of the issues raised … in our daily work to assist people, many of whom cannot understand why they have Centrelink debts when they have been doing the right thing,” she said.

In one recent case, a young casual worker, Sarah, successfully challenged a $6,900 debt. Centrelink calculated the unlawful debt using the income-averaging method based on ATO data which overstated her earnings from casual employment over the financial year.

The Department of Human Services general manager, Hank Jongen, said the department “strongly refutes any claims that it has conducted its compliance activities in a manner which is inconsistent with the legislation”.

“The independent review by the commonwealth ombudsman found the online compliance system meets all legislative requirements, accurately calculates debts when the required information is entered, and debts raised are consistent with the previous investigation processes,” he said.

Carney said the “illegality” of the robodebt program has “continued unchecked for 18 months as at the date of writing, despite [first tier] decisions invalidating it” and that the normative effect of AAT decisions does not appear to be working.

Carney argued that Centrelink’s conduct using averages in internal reviews and AAT challenges “arguably breaches” the commonwealth’s model litigant policy, which requires fair play and for litigation not to oppress citizens.

He cited the recent full federal court case Shord v Commissioner of Taxation for the proposition that a breach – if established – may result in professional misconduct proceedings, contempt or criminal sanctions.

Carney suggested that “because there may or may not be a recoverable overpayment (usually in a different and lower amount)” the AAT should set aside debt assessments based on averaging, and send them back to be recalculated based on “precise information of earnings in relevant fortnights”.

He also suggested the AAT should use pre-hearing powers to demand Centrelink give more documents and set out the legal basis of the debt.. Department of Human Services staff will strike over pay, budget cuts and the Centrelink “robo debt” scandal, which together form an “ideological attack” by the Turnbull government, according to the Community and Public Sector union.

The CPSU announced the planned strike action on Monday, saying problems in the department went “far deeper” than Centrelink’s controversial automated debt recovery system, which has been criticised for its inaccuracy and unfairness.

“The Turnbull government has rightly been condemned over the Centrelink automated debt debacle but the problems go far deeper in the Department of Human Services because of years of budget cuts and the government’s harsh and illogical public-sector bargaining policy,” the union’s national secretary, Nadine Flood, said.

The union will strike and take other forms of industrial action at various locations across six days from mid to late February. Staff who provide critical services, including those helping victims of the debt recovery system, will not go on strike.

The department said the strike action had the potential to affect Centrelink, Medicare and child support services across the country.

The department’s general manager, Hank Jongen, said any disruptions would likely hit telephone and face-to-face services on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday next week.

“We’re asking customers to use the self-service options available through myGov and the Centrelink, Medicare and child support mobile apps,” Jongen said.



“Of course, anyone who needs to speak to us can phone or visit, they just need to know that this may take longer due to the industrial action,” he said. Jongen said customer payments would not be affected.

Flood said the department’s 34,000 staff had gone without a pay rise for three years, while trying to cope with 5,000 job losses and significant budget cuts.



“Our members hope this action will highlight the damage being caused to DHS and their plight through enterprise bargaining,” Flood said. “Hundreds of them made personal submissions last year to the Senate inquiry into public-sector bargaining, telling their personal stories of financial hardship and their worries about the enterprise agreement being pushed by their bosses.”

The strike action will put more pressure on the government to give the department more resources, following a period of intense pressure over the automated debt recovery scheme. From July, the government significantly reduced the level of human oversight over the debt recovery system, relying on an automated data matching process to detect discrepancies in income reported to Centrelink and income reported to the tax office.

That process has been criticised as flawed, because the system can double count the same employer, or crudely average out a yearly income over Centrelink’s 26 fortnightly reporting periods. Both problems can result in individuals wrongly being deemed ineligible to have claimed welfare. Where a discrepancy is detected, the system automatically sends a letter demanding an explanation from welfare recipients. If none is given, or if the letter is not received or responded to, the debt is raised and people are told to begin paying.

Flood said the industrial action was designed to highlight the Turnbull government’s ideological attacks on the department and the actions of senior management, who had “blindly followed” the Coalition’s agenda.

“Our members are doing this because they care about the quality of the services they provide, which is why workers dealing with sensitive clients such as those being dragged through the robo-debt crisis will not be taking industrial action,” Flood said.

“These workers are among the lowest paid in the commonwealth public sector and stand to lose the most under the government’s harsh public-sector bargaining policy.

“Their pay has been frozen as the government’s bullied them, trying to strip essential rights, such as the family friendly conditions that allow a call centre worker to balance shift work with raising a family.”

Industrial action will take place on 13, 15, 17, 20, 22 and 24 February.. Indigenous Australians have fallen victim to the growing Centrelink debt notice scandal, in which hundreds of thousands of people have received official letters demanding welfare money be repaid; only many of the alleged ‘debts’ have turned out to be wrong. NITV News has been inundated by stories from more than 100 people claiming they were erroneously told they owed Centrelink money.





Since July 2016, a total of 170,000 debt recovery notices have been sent out to Centrelink recipients informing them they had committed fraud for underreporting their income and demanding they pay back thousands of dollars or face debt collectors. In some cases, the alleged outstanding balances exceeded $20,000.





Rachel Singe’s husband Travis received a letter demanding $23,000 from Centrelink in 2016, claiming the couple had not reported their income correctly.





“We went through all our tax reports and payslips and were told that he had not reported properly when he was working casually, even though we both reported every fortnight and usually reported that we had earned more than we actually did,” she told NITV News.





“It's so frustrating when you do everything by the rules and get a higher paying job so you no longer need Centrelink payments, and then get stung with a fine like this.”





The demands for non-existent debts come as a result of a new information sharing agreement between Centrelink and the Australian Tax Office (ATO), which is averaging people’s annual income across a whole year. Periods where people reported no income have now been incorrectly recorded against them by Centrelink as income earning periods.





The algorithm used is unable to differentiate between fortnightly reported income and the total income earned in a financial year. It’s been reported that no one at Centrelink foresaw the problems this would create.





School teacher Nicholas Kuilder received Newstart payments for 6 months in 2012 while looking for new work after relocating to a new city. Once he obtained work he cancelled Centrelink and thought nothing more of it.





“I then receive a letter claiming I owe Centrelink over $3800 from that financial year,” he told NITV News.





“This didn't seem right as I always reported my income correctly and was pretty diligent with my paperwork.





“Once I was able to get a hold of someone, I spoke with a person who seemed to have the ‘guilty until proven innocent’ stance, they were incredibly hostile over the phone.” Centrelink debt claim under the new automated system. Source: Supplied Nicholas had to wait another two weeks before he could get someone on the phone.





“We then found that the fault in the problem was that their system did not recognise that the schools I was reporting as having worked at all fell under the banner of the Department of Education, and were not separate ABN's from my Payslips. So essentially, they had doubled all of my reported earnings from the time I was on Centrelink,” he said.





“They also did not take into account that I was only on Centrelink for 6 months and that the previous 6 months were where a majority of my earnings from the financial year took place.”





Department of Human Services General Manager Hank Jongen told NITV News the letters were not debt demands.





"When data differences are detected, the system generates a letter (this is not a debt letter) advising people of the difference and asking them to either confirm or update their details online using myGov," he said in a written statement.





"If the employment income was earned before they began receiving or after they stopped receiving income support payments, then they will not incur a debt."





He also said that a majority of claims had been able to successfully resolved through Centrelink, but did not say in how many cases Centrelink had wrongly calculated a discrepancy using ATO data.





"Over 70 per cent (72 per cent) of people who received an online compliance letter since September this year have completely resolved the matter," he said.





Many people said they had repaid debts they did not owe because the challenge of going back over many years of tax returns and pay slips was either too much or they found the Centrelink process for challenging the debt extremely difficult.





Daniel Hayes told NITV News he was halfway through repaying the debt when he started seeing news articles about the debt scandal. He has since stopped paying Centrelink.





“I’m in the middle of repaying them $3350 for apparently not declaring correctly in periods where I didn’t even have a job. When I asked for proof, they told me I had to go through my bank records, so I’ve paid it for a year down to $1600,” he said.





Other people reported receiving Centrelink payments during part of the year and correctly declaring, then going off Centrelink once they found work. Because that work occurred in the same financial year as the Centrelink payments, the new algorithm has taken that income and averaged it out evenly, so it appears recipients had earnings whilst receiving Centrelink payments. The result is a demand for a debt that never actually existed.





Davis Darren is seeking legal advice after receiving a debt notice for $2,500 for allegedly failing to declare income for periods he was not working.





“The dates they say I failed to declare I wasn't actually working, and they are impossible to call and deal with. I don't have time during the day to go to a centre due to working. I don't understand why this has come up four years later,” he told NITV News.





Michelle Lotarski was hit with a staggering $25,000 debt demand relating to her parenting payment over a period of three years.





“In 2011 I was working part time when I made a parenting payment claim. There was no problem and I started receiving payments,” she said.





“They told me at my first interview for claim that I only had to provide my payslips and an estimate earned for the year. I submitted my tax each year, did Centerlink’s annual income estimate each year, was getting paid fine for three years, then all of a sudden I received my outstanding debt of a massively scary $25,000.”





The Department of Human Services which has responsibility for Centrelink is organising "Advanced Customer Aggression Training" according to a tender it put out late last year, due to the huge number of complaints it was receiving.





Christian Porter, Minister for Human Services, said on Tuesday that the new system was working well, with only a small number of complaints. He added more than $300 million had been recovered from welfare recipients.





"The complaint rate is running at 0.16 per cent... only 276 complaints out of 169,000 letters, and that process has raised $300 million worth of money back to the taxpayer," he told ABC Radio on Tuesday.





He did not say how many disputes, rather than complaints, had been lodged or how much of that $300 million was wrongly claimed as debt by the new system.



. . . . In the lead-up to Christmas, tens of thousands of Australians started receiving threatening debt collection notices from Centrelink and its agents. Coming from a government that couldn’t run an online census, you can probably guess what happened. Ben Eltham explains just in case you can’t.

The worried emails and social media posts starting piling up in my inbox in December.

The problem? Centrelink. The government’s monolithic welfare agency is sending nasty letters to people out of the blue.

The government is calling it a “new online compliance system.” I prefer the catchy phrase “robo-debt.”

In the week before Christmas, thousands of Australians received letters or communications from Centrelink, or its appointed debt collectors.

Some received scary letters, informing them of debts in the thousands of dollars. Some logged into MyGov, the government’s creaking online information portal, to try and make a Medicare claim, only to discover a message that they owed thousands.

For others, the news came in a more threatening form: dozens of missed phone calls, culminating in threatening answering machine messages from debt collectors. Once again, the message was terrifying: they owed Centrelink thousands for an over-payment they knew nothing about.

For many, the debts that they owed to Centrelink were utterly mysterious. They had reported their income correctly at the time. There was simply no evidence that they had ever been over-paid.

The robo-debt dragnet began back in September. It has already generated considerable community anguish and concern. 169,000 robo-debt notices have already been sent.

We’ll call one Centrelink client we spoke to ‘Sally’. Her experience is indicative of what some people are going through.

“For about two weeks, I was struggling with some pretty serious anxiety as a result of daily automated phone messages and texts telling me I owed a debt. Some did not even identify themselves.

After a while, I typed the debt collectors’ name into a Google search, assuming it was some sort of phishing scam and found others saying it was on behalf of Centrelink. I called Centrelink, who confirmed that I had a debt and needed to pay the collectors directly as it was now out of their hands.

They had already taken my last tax return to help pay the debt.”

We spoke to another client, who we’ll call ‘Luke.’

“I have received a debt recovery notice from Dun and Bradstreet on behalf of the Department of Human Services, asking to be paid immediately! This is very distressing as I received this notice on Friday 22nd December, just before Christmas.

The issue is still unresolved as I spoke with a Centrelink staff person (after an hour wait). This person asked me to hold (again) while she spoke with somebody from Debt Recovery, but I was not able to speak with them, as they were ‘extremely busy’. They took my mobile number and told me they will be calling in the next 14 days. I was told there was nothing else I could do!

I have all my statements and Centrelink correspondence. The dates do not correlate and the amount is ridiculous.

Luke is in remission from an aggressive cancer. He was briefly on sickness allowance several years ago.

One of the most insidious aspects of the Centrelink dragnet is that people who have been issued with false robo-debt notices are no longer allowed to leave the country.

New Matilda spoke to one client, who we’ll call ‘Angus.’

They used the usual crude calculation without regard for casual work: annual income from the ATO averaged over a whole year. I corrected that, but am still awaiting new assessment.

My stress concerns the travel ban: I’m due to leave for Germany on January 10.

Angus is travelling to Germany on a one-way ticket to take up a job at a university there. “I can’t get any information,” he told us. “It’s very stressful.”

In the past week, New Matilda has spoken to more than 30 Centrelink clients who claim that they have been issued a debt notice in error.

The most common issues for Centrelink clients that we spoke to were simple and glaring errors of data, like incorrect names for employers, or mismatched annual and fortnightly earnings.

One Centrelink client, ‘Julie’, told us that “they simply took my annual income for that year and averaged it over all fortnights (which would have made me ineligible) instead of the actual dates of payment/employment.”

Many others echoed her complaint:

“They averaged out my annual income over the full 52 weeks, meaning I was ‘overpaid’ some weeks. I called and spent two hours on the phone, the guy prefaced our chat by saying ‘Centrelink is never wrong, you’re going to have to pay’.

Once I emerged from the chaos of the first four weeks, I discovered that the debt had already been escalated to a collection agency. They are consistently hassling me and have informed me they can ‘garnish’ my wages and take the money from my bank account.”

Like the government’s last data debacle, the 2016 Census, it’s clear that there are massive IT failures here. This is not just a few glitches and bugs. A government department is sending out tens of thousands of erroneous communications accusing welfare recipients of over-payment. The government is falsely accusing some of the most vulnerable members of our community.

The stories of misery have quickly filled up large swathes of the media: the Guardian has reported on it in detail, thanks to the diligent work of Christopher Knaus, as has Crikey and Triple J’s Hack program. On Twitter, Asher Wolf has been an active citizen-journalist.

The outpouring of misery on social media also shows the scale of Centrelink’s robo-debt failure. The psychological impacts of the heavy-handed government grab should be obvious. Independent MP Andrew Wilkie has already documented several cases of Centrelink clients “who I would describe as presenting as suicidal.”

New Matilda has also spoken to two Centrelink clients who have reported feeling suicidal ideation in the wake of receiving their Centrelink robo-debt.

In a typical example of the sociopathic nature of Centrelink’s behaviour, the agency has used Twitter throughout 2016 to refer people affected by debt issues to counselling service Lifeline.

Why is the robo-debt algorithm so erroneous? Time and again, one key issue that clients raise is that the system cannot differentiate between annual income and fortnightly income profiles.

New Matilda has heard from multiple sources inside Centrelink that the system cannot distinguish between the annual earnings figures provided by the Australian Tax Office, and the more granular fortnightly earnings profiles that most Centrelink payments are assessed against.

The two data sets measure different things, and they should not be used as interchangeable tests for over-payment.

Annual salary figures provide just that: an annual sum of earnings from a particular employer. But many payments are assessed fortnightly, and so an average figure will be wildly inconsistent with the fortnightly profile of a client’s earnings.

But that’s just the tip of the iceberg. Even the most basic details, such as employers’ names, appear to be frequently in error. Many clients reported to us that rudimentary mistakes were recorded that any human could have picked up, for instance typos, ABN input errors, or that the ATO or Centrelink had confused trade names and business names of employers.

New Matilda has spoken to a source inside Centrelink who confirms that the robo-debt dragnet is completely broken.

“It’s a flawed system,” the source told us. “To use an analogy, it’s like using a sledgehammer to perform open heart surgery.

“Let’s say someone is on Newstart or sickness allowance for eight weeks. During that time they receive little to no income. When they return to work for the rest of the year they obviously earn, and they subsequently lodge a tax return.”

In this scenario, they will still be sent a letter claiming they owe thousands of dollars, when in fact they don’t.

The Centrelink source told us that “the earnings might be spot on and recorded correctly, but the automated system is not going to be able to reconcile all of those instances with a data match. [It] is inevitably going to end in a letter, even though the calculations during the time on benefits were likely correct.”

In other words, the new system appears purpose built to generate as many robo-debt notices as possible … perhaps in the expectation that some clients will simply pay, rather than fight the government and its aggressive tactics.

One Centrelink client that we talked to did just that. “After two weeks of feeling like I was being scammed and/or harassed, I just paid it off,” the client told us. The advantages for the government’s bottom line are obvious.

And, in fact, we know that the Department of Human Services knows about the fortnightly-payments glitch. On Twitter, Simon Elvery posted a link to an official DHS website that frankly discusses the shake-down.

“If employment is for a part of a year only, averaging over 12 months will not result in a correct result if the customer should have received a full rate at other times of the year,” the DHS document admits.

This kind of shake-down should not be acceptable as a matter of government policy. The federal government is callously pursuing tens of thousands of Australians for completely fictional ‘debts’.

Even when clients successfully respond to the robo-debt letters from Centrelink, the stress and worry is often considerable. The MyGov website is notoriously difficult to use for people who aren’t IT-savvy.

The government’s faith in the online tool as a simple and usable method for dealing with Centrelink debt notices is laughably out of touch.

The site itself is a usability disaster that makes it ridiculously difficult to perform simple tasks, like requesting the review of a debt by an Authorised Review Officer.

Some Centrelink clients are not literate enough to use a website like MyGov. Some Centrelink clients have no internet. Some in the regions have only intermittent phone reception. And yet there appears to be little sympathy in the government or the top echelons of Centrelink for such practical difficulties.

The robo-debt dragnet is extraordinarily large. According to the Coalition’s Minister for Human Services, Alan Tudge, the new system is sending out 20,000 of these compliance notices a week. “Over three years it is expected to carry out 1.7 million compliance interventions,” Tudge said in a media release on December 5.

According to Centrelink’s statement to New Matilda, “72 per cent of people who received an online compliance letter since September this year have completely resolved the matter.”

Unless our maths is wrong, that means 28 per cent of people have not resolved the matter. At a rate of 20,000 a week, the number of people affected by unresolved compliance letters must stretch into the tens of thousands.

Centrelink also says that “only 2.2 per cent of customers were requested to supply supporting documentation.” At a rate of 20,000 a week, that’s 440 a week being hit with documentation requests. It’s probably more than this, given the level of Centrelink chaos the robo-debt fiasco has revealed.

440 audits a week is a significant figure, by any measure of human dignity, let alone compliance. It dwarfs the kind of compliance efforts being directed at large corporations, let alone the government’s risible efforts to collect mining and petroleum royalties.

Indeed the very design of the policy must mean that huge numbers of Australians will be swept up in the Centrelink dragnet. The government plans to raise a whopping $3.7 billion by these methods over the forward estimates.

It’s there in the MYEFO for all to see.

“The Government will achieve savings of $3.7 billion ($2.1 billion in underlying cash terms) over four years from 2016-17 by expanding the Department of Human Services’ (DHS) fraud prevention and debt recovery capability,” the budget papers state.

“From 1 January 2017, DHS will implement a package of initiatives to enhance the integrity of social welfare payments, including expanding and extending data matching activities with the Australian Taxation Office and improving engagement with welfare recipients to ensure that they understand and meet their obligations.”

But the government’s gleeful boasts about the new online system clawing back “$4.5 million in welfare debts a day” conceals a brutal and clumsy new algorithm that appears unable to prevent even rudimentary errors.

The aggressive debt recovery policy can be seen in the context of a government that harbours a deep animosity to the concept of welfare itself. Tudge was strident in his language on welfare last year, complaining that Centrelink was too lenient on job seekers. “We must face the reality that in our desire to be a generous and caring society we may have reached a point where we have taken our good intentions too far,” he said in a policy speech in October.

In November he sent out a media release championing the government’s Taskforce Integrity, which has been prosecuting welfare fraud in the Adelaide region. “The Government is committed to strengthening the integrity of the welfare system by cracking down on fraud and overpayments to ensure taxpayers’ money only goes to those who genuinely need a helping hand.”

Tudge has also threatened people with welfare debts with jail time, should the Commonwealth successfully prosecute them.

“We’ll find you, we’ll track you down and you will have to repay those debts and you may end up in prison,” he told Nine’s A Current Affair on December 5.

One theory to explain the government’s intransigence is that it believes being tough on welfare is a political positive, signalling to voters that it will crack down on rorters and bludgers.

This may explain why the government doesn’t care about the glitches. It’s quite happy with the new system. It’s part of a concerted attempt to wring every last cent out of Centrelink, whatever the consequences for individuals.

Social Services Minister Christian Porter (filling in for the holidaying Alan Tudge) has been crystal clear about the robo-debt letters: this is exactly what the government intends. “I think that this is about as reasonable a process as you could possibly derive,” Porter told ABC’s Radio National this week.

As for Centrelink, the agency’s official position is that there is no problem. Centrelink’s Hank Jongen told New Matilda in a response to our queries that “we are confident in the online compliance system, and associated checking process that we go through with recipients.”

In the past, staff manually checked customer records against data provided by other government agencies such as the Australian Taxation Office. While the new online compliance system automates part of this process, it does not change how income is assessed or how debts are calculated – it is an easy way to confirm details and resolve any outstanding matters. When data differences are detected, the system generates a letter (this is not a debt letter) advising people of the difference and asking them to either confirm or update their details online using myGov.

Jongen finished his statement with a resounding declaration that “the department is determined to ensure that people get what they are entitled to, nothing more, nothing less.”

Jongen’s insouciance conceals the fact that Centrelink is in crisis. New Matilda spoke to a source in the union representing Centrelink, the CPSU. She pointed out that staff at Centrelink are already striking over the government’s stalled enterprise bargaining negotiations, and that morale inside the agency is at rock bottom in the wake of the automation changes.

“The decision to automate was one of cutting the costs of labour, but it is one that will cost the department many times over because of the shoddy computer systems they are using,” the CPSU source told us.

The joke inside Centrelink is that the Department of Human Services should really be called the “Department of Computer Non-Services”, because the automation is so chaotic and mismanaged.

“Many CPSU members state that the workplace has become unbearable,” the source continued. “They are in a situation where everyone is on edge, poor policy decisions are being forced upon them, the work has become very stressful and they are seeing an erosion of their working conditions which they are fighting desperately for.”

As for the Minister, Alan Tudge? New Matilda tried to contact Minister Tudge a number of times for comment in relation to this story.

Tudge is “on leave”, according to his media advisor. Apparently happy with the robo-debt fiasco, Tudge went on holidays in mid-December, and has been refusing to front the media ever since.

On the 8th of January, Tudge was still on holidays. Meanwhile, the crisis in his portfolio is spiralling out of control.. . The Morrison government is fighting to keep under wraps documents that a former public servant says could show “what went wrong” with Centrelink’s botched robodebt program.

The man seeking the documents, IT expert Justin Warren, argues they should be released so the public could learn lessons from the scandal.

Lawyers for Warren, who has sought the documents under freedom of information laws, argued in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal on Wednesday that it was “difficult to conceive of a stronger case for the most robust accountability”.

But the government says cabinet confidentiality would be undermined if the documents were released, and its counsel, Andrew Berger QC, flagged this week the case may yet head to the federal court if government agency Services Australia loses the case.

The three-day sitting is the latest development in a four-year freedom of information battle between the government and Warren, who has requested the “business case” documents for what became the robodebt program.

Officially known as the income compliance program, robodebt led to 443,000 victims being issued unlawful welfare debts in what a federal court judge this month labelled a “shameful chapter” in public administration.

Labor and the Greens are among those who have called for a royal commission, pointing to the estimated $1.7bn in unlawful debts and the serious mental health and financial distress experienced by some victims.

The information commissioner granted Warren access to 10 of the 13 documents in 2019 but the government appealed to the AAT.

The tribunal this week heard the documents contained “detailed costings”, requests for these costings, and other financial data about the proposed Centrelink debt recovery system.

They include what are known as draft “new policy proposal” documents and purported attachments about what was a massive ramp-up of compliance against welfare recipients using increased automation.

At issue is whether the documents in question were prepared for the cabinet process or were simply being worked on internally by the Department of Human Services which later became Services Australia.

Under cross-examination from Warren’s lawyer Tom Brennan SC, a former human services official, Scott Britton, agreed some of the documents could help to ascertain “what went wrong” with the program.

That included knowing what particular ministers had been told about the proposal at the time.

Senior ministers between 2015-16 included the former social services ministers, Scott Morrison and Christian Porter, who were members of cabinet, and the former human services ministers, Marise Payne and Alan Tudge, who were not.

Despite the court case, ministers have so far escaped scrutiny about what they were told about the risks of the program.

Britton, a former manager of compliance at the Department of Human Services, was shown a risk management plan, previously reported by the Guardian, that said possible severe risks of the proposal included “national public outrage” and a “significant breach of legislation and/or judicial inquiry”.

Britton left the department in 2016, a year into the robodebt program’s operation, to join the National Disability Insurance Scheme.

He told the tribunal on Wednesday he was not the author of the documents sought by Warren, meaning he could not give evidence as to what happened to them up the chain.

Brennan said keeping the documents secret would create a risk that “we as a country fail to learn the lessons of robodebt”.

There was likely “granular detail” in the documents and there was “great public interest” in ensuring that “everybody is able to understand” what went wrong, he said.

View image in fullscreen Robodebt wrongly issued debts to thousands of victims, including Nathan Kearney, who was forced to move back in with his parents for two years. Photograph: David Kelly/The Guardian

Brennan pointed to the federal court judgment – which noted the government’s debt recovery method was “unlawful” – and said the public ought to be able to learn more about what led to the “disaster that occurred”.

He also questioned why the government had not called more senior officials, such as Kathryn Campbell, then boss of human services and now the secretary of the Department of Social Services, to give evidence showing a link between the documents and the cabinet process.

Berger told the tribunal there was “extremely strong public interest” in keeping the documents secret to avoid an “intrusion into … confidentiality”. He said releasing them could have a chilling effect on public servants who may be less frank in their advice to ministers due to the fear it could be made public.

Berger also played down the significance of the content of the documents, saying they would would “reveal little if anything” about the income compliance program.

The government also called Leonie McGregor, a top official of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, who gave evidence that she believed the documents had been prepared as part of the cabinet process.

Some were “well advanced” drafts of policy proposals, and others contained information that fed into that proposal, the tribunal heard. This meant they should be considered part of the cabinet process, McGregor said.

McGregor said her expert view was based on the appearance of the documents, her experience of the cabinet process, and searches of the cabinet portal. She did not work in either of the departments in question at the time.

Warren’s case is being run pro bono by Maurice Blackburn and the Grata Fund’s FOI Project.

The AAT deputy president, Peter Britten-Jones, will consider further written submissions from the parties before a possible final hearing at a later date.. A “shameful chapter” in public administration has led to the federal court approving a settlement worth $1.8bn between the commonwealth and victims of the Coalition’s robodebt scheme.

Justice Bernard Murphy in Friday’s judgment criticised the federal government’s “massive failure”, noting the court had heard “heart-wrenching” stories of pain and anguish from victims of the Centrelink debt recovery program.

The judge said it should have been “obvious” to government ministers and senior public servants that the debt-raising method central to the scheme was flawed. He said the evidence showed it was unlawful.

The robodebt scheme, which ran between 2015 and November 2019, saw the government unlawfully raise $1.76bn in debts against 443,000 people, the court heard.

Murphy said the government had pursued about 381,000 people, unlawfully recovering $751m, including through private debt collectors. He noted that one mother had linked her son’s suicide to the debt recovery program.

Gordon Legal brought a class action on behalf of all victims last year after a court ruling in 2019 in response to a Victoria Legal Aid challenge paved the way for a wider case.

In response to the class action, the government has agreed to repay at least 381,000 people $751m and wipe all debts – worth $1.76bn – that were raised using the unlawful method of “income averaging” tax office data to check welfare payments.

Friday’s settlement “gives legal effect” to this pledge and also adds $112m in interest, which will be shared between 394,000 victims, depending on the size of their debt and how long they were without their money.

“The proceeding has exposed a shameful chapter in the administration of the commonwealth social security system and a massive failure of public administration,” Murphy said.

But the judge did not think there was evidence that proved the government knew the scheme was “unlawful” when it was established.

“I am reminded of the aphorism that, given a choice between a stuff-up, even a massive one, and a conspiracy, one should usually choose a stuff-up,” Murphy said.

About 200,000 people originally included in the class action will not receive any benefit from the settlement.

Murphy said those people’s debts had eventually been substantiated using their own payslips or other evidence, meaning they were valid and they had owed the money.

He said they would have needed to show that their debts were “tainted with illegality” to be owed compensation, a claim he said had “weak prospects of success”.

In approving the settlement, Murphy also said a more serious negligence claim originally brought by Gordon Legal would have been unlikely to succeed. The government did not accept legal liability in settling the case.

Some 680 people who objected to the settlement will be allowed to opt-out. The court heard earlier this year that some believed the interest payments were insufficient and the government had not been held accountable for its mistakes.

Murphy said the objections showed cases of “financial hardship, anxiety and distress, including suicidal ideation and in some cases suicide” that they said they suffered from the scheme. They also felt shame from being branded “welfare cheats”.

“It is plain enough that many group members continue to feel a great deal of anguish, upset and anger at the way in which they or their loved ones were treated,” Murphy said.

The judge said the government “ought to have ensured that it had a proper legal basis” to raise debts, noting many welfare recipients were “marginalised or vulnerable and ill-equipped” to challenge an overpayment.

“The proceeding revealed that the commonwealth completely failed in fulfilling that obligation,” he said. “Its failure was particularly acute given that many people who faced demands for repayment of unlawfully asserted debts could ill afford to repay those amounts.”

Andrew Grech, a Gordon Legal partner, said the firm and its clients were delighted by the outcome.

“We hope that this outcome brings peace of mind and some certainty to all class action members and acts as a strong deterrent against similar callous welfare practices for both present and future governments,” he said.

Bill Shorten, who announced the Gordon Legal class action in 2019, said a robodebt royal commission was now “inevitable”.

“You can’t make a $2bn compliance fail, and no one’s lost their job, no one’s accountable,” he told Guardian Australia.

Shorten said the court’s suggestion the scheme was more likely a “stuff up” than “conspiracy” meant the government had been “shamefully stupid, not shamefully bad”.

“But when are you so recklessly stupid that it becomes bad?” he said.

Greens senator Rachel Siewert, who has long campaigned against the robodebt scheme, also called for a royal commission. “Robodebt cost lives, it has ruined many many more and has been the cause of immeasurable pain and anguish,” she said.

Guardian Australia revealed in March last year that the government was drawing up plans to repay victims of the scheme because legal advice showed it would otherwise lose in court.

Murphy approved $8.4m to be deducted from the settlement for Gordon Legal’s costs to date but wanted more evidence before agreeing to a further $4.2m for fees for distributing compensation.. The federal government has settled a landmark challenge against its robodebt program – conceding a $2,500 debt raised against Deanna Amato was not lawful because it relied on income averaging.

In orders made by consent on Wednesday, the federal court declared the debt was “not validly made”, that an order to garnishee Amato’s tax return was also invalid and there was no basis to add a 10% penalty to the debt.

Rowan McRae, the executive director of civil justice access at Victorian Legal Aid, said the case has “helped to clarify the unlawfulness of the robodebt system for hundreds of thousands of Australians in the same situation, who received or paid off a robodebt based only on averaging”.

Last week the federal government abandoned sole reliance on income averaging to calculate debts, dismantling a central plank of the robodebt program’s automation which has seen tens of thousands of welfare recipients overcharged for alleged debts.

Welfare groups, legal centres, Senate inquiries and a former administrative appeals tribunal senior member, Terry Carney, have all warned that income averaging is not a proper basis to claim a debt.

The same argument is being pursued in a class action by Gordon Legal challenging the legality of the entire program.

Amato, a 34-year-old local government employee, found out Centrelink claimed she owed a debt in January after it sent repeated notices to an old address then garnished her $1,700 tax refund.

Amato disputed the debt in the federal court, prompting the commonwealth to reduce her debt to $1.48 in September, but the case continued even after the radical overhaul to the system announced by government services minister Stuart Robert.

In a statement explaining the consent orders, the court noted the initial debt of $2,900 was calculated based on Australian Taxation Office income data averaged across fortnightly periods as if this were Amato’s actual income in each period.

The court said the conclusion Amato had received social security benefits she was not entitled to was “not open on the material before the decision-maker” because there was “no probative material” that the average reflected Amato’s actual income.

“In the circumstances, there was no material before the decision-maker capable of supporting the conclusion that a debt had arisen … The conclusion that a debt had arisen was therefore irrational, in the requisite legal sense.”

The court ordered the commonwealth to pay Amato’s costs and $92 interest.

Amato said she was delighted at the “amazing” news. “You can feel so small and helpless next to the government, but I am so glad that the unfair and ultimately unlawful aspects of this system have been brought to light,” she said in a statement.

“I had my money refunded to me, but I hope that others who have paid dodgy debts will also have a way to get their money back.

“I feel a weight lifted off my shoulders. I’ve proven my innocence, but also proven that there are reasons why you need all the facts before you can demand debt payments from people.”

McRae said while last week’s changes are “significant” they came “too late for many people who have experienced distress and hardship, or who have already paid robodebts through tax garnishee action and debt collectors”.

“Today’s result shows the federal government has accepted what advocates have been saying for years – using only income averaging to raise debts is both inaccurate and inconsistent with the Social Security Act.”

The shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus said the judgment “simply confirms that we have got a Commonwealth government that has been extorting money from Australian citizens with no basis for doing so”.

“It’s an extraordinary scandal, robodebt,” he told the ABC. “I just think that the prime minister owes the Australian people an apology for this extraordinary program.”

On Wednesday the Senate passed a motion ordering the government to produce legal advice explaining why it made the changes to the system, with Greens senator Rachel Siewert demanding to know “the legal status of this program”.. . The Australian government has privately acknowledged the robodebt scandal may go beyond the unlawful 470,000 debts already identified for refunds, but it has no plans to pay back the money because it believes it would be too difficult to identify victims.

Amid growing fears unlawful debts could date back decades, the Guardian can reveal ministers were told in February the now unlawful ATO income averaging method was a longstanding “last resort” practice used to enforce Centrelink overpayment debts.

Confidential advice seen by the Guardian said: “As the identified invalidity would apply to all versions of the practice, there is a risk of Commonwealth liability for all actions outside the Programme including pre-1 July 2015 actions.

“The proposed approach would not address that potential liability. Any claims will be managed on a case-by-base basis.”

The government on Friday conceded the practice – which enforces debts using ATO annual income data compared against fortnightly pay reported by Centrelink recipients – was unlawful as it vowed to repay 330,000 people affected by faulty debts.

But it only promised to issue refunds to “all income compliance debts raised from our use of income averaging since 2015-16”.

The advice does not state the potential number of debts issued to people before 2015 that were raised using income averaging, or their value, but experts said it was likely to be much smaller than the post-2015 debts.

However, the Department of Human Services has previously told the commonwealth ombudsman it had used the practice since the early 1980s. Guardian Australia has seen records from one likely case dating back to 2008.

In the ministerial submission, prepared for Stuart Robert, Anne Ruston and Christian Porter by Services Australia, it was claimed that pre-2015 victims would be too difficult to identify.

The ministers were also told the issue was less pressing because any pre-2015 debts were not targeted by the ongoing class action brought by Gordon Legal.

It is the latest in a series of revelations from the leaked advice, which allowed the Guardian to report in March that the government had conceded it would need to refund hundreds of thousands of robodebts.

Darren O’Donovan, a prominent expert on the robodebt scheme, called for a full independent judicial inquiry and a forensic audit of all files.

“We must have the full truth about this department’s stubbornly unlawful debt raising,” O’Donovan said. “Were they ever going to tell people?”

View image in fullscreen Source: Leaked ministerial submission/Guardian graphic. Illustration: Guardian Design

The La Trobe University administrative law academic acknowledged the number of unlawful debts raised before 2015 would be “much smaller” when “compared to the industrial upfront averaging which began in 2015”.

“But each and every one of these will have been life-changing for those on the margins,” he said. “We have no idea how many employers answered requests for information, how many records were unavailable.”

Guardian Australia approached Robert and Services Australia for comment about whether it would repay pre-2015 income-averaged debts, and whether unlawful debts could date back to the early 1980s.

Robert’s office referred questions to the agency, whose spokesman, Hank Jongen, said: “This announcement only relates to the Income Compliance Program introduced in the 2015-16 financial year.

“Services Australia conducts all welfare payment administration in good faith, based on the best understanding of social security law when decisions are made.

“All decisions can be appealed and anyone who has concerns about a ruling made by the agency can seek a review at any time.”

Ahead of a potential class action trial, Robert, the government services minister, announced on Friday his agency would begin processing $721m worth of refunds from July.

Services Australia justified excluding pre-2015 debts by arguing a lack of “standardised tools and systems” meant “in most other cases it is not possible to identity the use of averaged ATO income data” outside the income compliance – or robodebt – program.

The advice also noted the class action brought by Gordon Legal “related only to debts raised after 1 July 2015 in the Programme”, which meant not addressing these debts “therefore will not affect settlement of the class action”.

But O’Donovan said every debt “regardless of age must be audited”.

That included debts substantiated using bank statements, which the Guardian on Saturday revealed the government had also admitted could not be legally used to enforce Centrelink overpayments.

“Any debt issued on the basis of averaged data alone must be set aside,” O’Donovan said. “The fact that averaging was used as a last resort after unsuccessful searches for payslips does not change the legal position. A debt must be based on rational proof of actual earned fortnightly income.”

Guardian Australia has seen records from one appeal made to Centrelink in 2017 that refers to the agency having used ATO data as the “most accurate source of information” to raise a debt in May 2008.

It is understood the welfare recipient had appealed about a decade later, once the robodebt scandal had emerged.

A Centrelink authorised review officer said in the 2017 decision the “unavailability of … wage records or bank statements” in late 2007 meant it was “correct to use annualised ATO information to determine the overpayment”.

Under income averaging, Centrelink staff used ATO pay information to calculate a debt by dividing a yearly income summary into 26 fortnights and data-matching the results against what a welfare recipient reported to the agency while they received benefits.

Compliance officers manually conducted this work before it was automated on a small scale using data-matching by the former Labor government in 2011.

The results of ATO income averaged pay calculations were used to ask welfare recipients to “update” their income records and if a discrepancy remained, Centrelink would issue an overpayment debt and in some cases seize the person’s tax return.

Income averaging was used only as a “last resort” until 2015, when the Coalition turbocharged the income compliance program, boosting the number of “compliance interventions” from 20,000 a year to 20,000 a week in the quest for budget savings.

Do you know more? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.com. . . The federal government has finally agreed to pay back hundreds of thousands of people who were hit with unlawful and incorrect Centrelink debts over a four-year period through the Coalition’s botched robodebt scheme.

Years after vowing to recoup at least $3bn from welfare recipients and doggedly defending the program’s legality, the government said on Friday it would repay 470,000 debts that were entirely or partially raised using the discredited “income-averaging” calculations.

Stuart Robert, the government services minister, said the refunds would be received by 373,000 people, cost a total $721m and would include recovery fee charges. The debt refunds would begin from July, he said.

Robert, who was also the human services minister in 2015 when aspects of the robodebt scheme were established, did not apologise on Friday, saying the scheme “was developed to make identifying welfare overpayments more efficient”.

The announcement, delivered in the shadow of a federal court class action, confirmed reporting by the Guardian revealing the government had privately acknowledged it would need to pay back hundreds of thousands of people.

Robert’s statement did not say whether the government would agree to pay interest on the debts, a key demand from the class action led by Gordon Legal.

The firm vowed on Friday to continue to pursue compensation, arguing the court should approve the refunds process to ensure victims maintained their rights to claim damages and interest.

Guardian Australia has previously revealed the government was reluctant to pay interest and that the Commonwealth’s legal team was instructed to oppose interest repayments in mediation, which is due to begin next month.

It is also understood no decision has yet been made on the future of the program.

But Robert said on Friday the government would “move forward with our income compliance program with further proof points to ensure it remains sufficient”.

“The government started this program over half a decade ago based on the best information at the time,” he said.

“The information presented to me saw a change in November, I acted swiftly on behalf of the government to pause debt recovery and to refine the system. So again, we’re moving forward on the best information we have.”

Bill Shorten, Labor’s government services spokesman, said the government only offered the refund because a court date had been set for July.

“Government ministers were going to have to turn up to court in empty witness-box seats and explain what they knew, when they knew, why the federal government … had been taking hundreds of millions of dollars off vulnerable Australians and why they had no legal authority to do these actions,” he said.

The Greens senator and long-time robobdebt critic, Rachel Siewert, said it was a “historic day”.

“I am overwhelmed thinking of the untold suffering that this illegal scheme has caused,” she said.

The origins of the robodebt scheme date back to July 2015 and involved a combination of data-matching to identify potential targets and faulty debt calculations by “income averaging” annual tax office pay data and comparing it to fortnightly pay declared by welfare recipients.

It also featured a heavily reliance on Centrelink labour hire staff tasked with calculating debts and sending out letters, while millions were spent contracting private debt collection agencies to chase up people who ignored debt letters.

During the 2016 federal election, the Turnbull government promised to bolster the program, which was yet to cause great scandal, promising to enhance income-data matching by using ATO pay data to chase up alleged debts.

But in late 2016, the scheme erupted in scandal as a growing number of people started complaining about receiving debts. Centrelink had boosted “compliance interventions” from 20,000 per year to 20,000 per week, according to then human services minister Alan Tudge.

Since then, critics have argued the system relies on a crude calculation of a person’s income, by taking annual income data held by the tax office and “averaging” it over each fortnight.

In order to challenge the debt, welfare recipients were told to provide payslips or bank statements to prove the income they had reported to Centrelink at the time was correct.

Scheme becomes scandal in 2016

In late 2016, Christian Porter, the social services minister at the time, made a virtue of the fact most debts were simply calculated using the ATO averaged calculations.

Defending the scheme, he said: “Monies are being identified and being paid back to the taxpayer – indeed, $300 million so far, with a tiny complaint rate, and only in a very rare and few instances, indeed 2.2%, has there even been the requirement for documentary evidence to be provided.”

In November, the government settled a federal court case brought by Victoria Legal Aid and announced it would no longer raise debts without first gathering evidence – such as payslips – to prove a person had underreported their earnings to Centrelink.

But at the time, Robert refused to apologise, describing the change as only a “refinement” and saying only a “small cohort” were affected.

In fact, secret government documents seen by the Guardian show Services Australia believes the scheme is only viable if it is able to demands welfare recipients to gather this evidence from the past employers’ in order to prove they did not owe the debt.

The debts related to alleged overpayments dated as far back as six years, by which point many recipients had changed employers and stopped receiving benefits.

Robert claimed on Friday he had acted as soon as “information came to light that showed there was a lack of sufficiency” around the debts raised using “income averaging”.

But although the scheme was not challenged in the courts until last year, the government was warned about its shaky legal foundations in 2017 when a senior member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal ruled five times that debts raised under the scheme were unlawful.

The first of two Senate inquiries into the scheme in 2018 heard claims from Greens senator Rachel Siewert that the families of at least five people said receiving a robodebt letter was a factor in their death.

Government advice seen by the Guardian showed the government expected in March to administer about 450,000 refunds, and that legal advice advised officials to seek a settlement on the basis it would likely lose in court on the “unjust enrichment” claim.

It abandoned a planned ramp-up of the scheme after Guardian Australia reported a leaked plan to target the vulnerable in 2019.

Do you know more? luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.com. Nathan Kearney says he lost two and half years of his life to robodebt. He’s still seeing a counsellor about it.

Four years ago he was living in Brisbane, seeing and playing gigs, working several different casual jobs and generally enjoying his 20s.

Then the debts came, first for about $2,000, and a year later for $4,500. It was the same story: you have underreported your income, you owe us this much money, please provide us your old payslips. He couldn’t.

Overwhelmed by the idea he now owed the government more than $6,000, Kearney moved back in with his parents in East Gippsland.

I wanted to know why those ministers felt that it was appropriate to use this illegal system and to target the most vulnerable Nathan Kearney

He was 27, dreams on hold, while he worked 50 hours a week in a country town he didn’t like just to regain a sense of financial stability.

“I feel like I got put back a couple of years in life because of this,” Kearney says. “And I would be closer to where I want to be at 31 years old if it hadn’t been for robodebt.”

On Monday the government reached a settlement with Gordon Legal, a law firm running a class action on behalf of hundreds of thousands of people caught up in the Coalition’s government welfare debt recovery program.

The settlement was for an eye-watering $1.2bn but almost all of the money came from the government’s May announcement to repay and wipe debts raised using the unlawful “income-averaging” of ATO pay data.

In fact, the only new figure was $111m in compensation that will be shared between about 430,000 victims.

The sums will vary significantly, depending on how much debt people had paid and how long they’d been without their money. Legal costs, which will be deducted from the compensation, are yet to be determined.

Many people have flooded victims’ group Facebook pages, as well as Gordon Legal’s own page, to express frustration at the compensation figure, which they feel does not reflect the pain or suffering the four-year program caused.

Moreover, some are angry that a scandal they see as being punctuated by continual cover-up and obfuscation never made it to a courtroom.

“I wanted to know why those ministers felt that it was appropriate to use this illegal system and to target the most vulnerable people,” Kearney says. “I wanted somebody to ask them to their faces: ‘Why did you think that it was OK to take money from the poorest people without giving them a chance to argue their case?’”

Others, like Jennifer Miller, whose son Rhys Cauzzo took his life when he was 28, say they intend to object to the settlement, which will need to be approved by the court. “There has been no accountability whatsoever,” Miller says.

Cauzzo lived with depression and anxiety but Miller believes the financial pressure that came from two Centrelink debts tipped him over the edge on Australia Day 2017.

Along with Kath Madgwick, whose son also took his life after receiving a Centrelink debt, Miller has been campaigning against the robodebt scheme for three years.

Like Kearney, she is insistent the case should have gone to court. “This isn’t over,” she says.

Gordon Legal emphasised this week that the settlement – an “excellent outcome” for clients and group members – should be viewed in its full context.

“When you think about the totality of what’s been achieved since the proceedings were commenced, that really amounts to more than $1.2bn,” said a partner at the law firm, Andrew Grech.

It was the Amato case brought by Victoria Legal Aid that established the legal precedent that ruled that robodebt’s “income averaging” unlawful.

But in the months afterwards, the government simply stonewalled. It said nothing about refunds and claimed only a “small cohort” of people had been affected.

Indeed, the refund decision in May, which Guardian Australia revealed two months earlier, was prompted by the need for a strategy to respond to the Gordon Legal class action.

In the lead-up to Monday’s announcement, it was clear that a settlement was looking likely.

And the $111m figure was said, from the government’s perspective, to represent the interest owed, rather than compensation for stress or anguish.

The government services minister, Stuart Robert, later publicly confirmed the government’s view of the compensation, noting it was for “the most part, for interest payments for money held”.

The commonwealth “has not accepted or admitted any liability in the matter”, Robert noted.

Though victims longed for their day in court, the two-week trial promised to be a fairly dry affair based mostly on documentary evidence and legal arguments.

The government did not plan to call any witnesses, so there was little prospect the former human services minister, Alan Tudge, or top departmental officials would need to take the stand.

In addition, the government’s prospects advice from earlier in the year said while it was likely a court would order refunds, plus interest, Gordon Legal’s negligence claim was unlikely to succeed.

Still, for some victims, the government’s lawyers would have been there in the “virtual” courtroom, defending their case.

Gordon Legal’s statement of claim, for example, alleged Centrelink was well aware of the distress the program had caused victims.

View image in fullscreen Kearney outside his home in Brisbane. Photograph: David Kelly/The Guardian

Kearney says it was the second debt that caused his mental health to plummet (he lives with chronic depression). He also fell out with some friends, though he notes they’ve since patched things up.

Because he continued to contest his debts, Centrelink eventually sent them off to a private debt collector who would call him three times a day.

Centrelink also garnisheed nearly $3,000 from his tax return.

“Once they [the debt collectors] started calling, they … put you into a certain headspace, which is like a shame and guilt spiral,” he says. “Whether or not you deserve to feel the shame or guilt, it’s still there within me.

“Sometimes they’d call and I’d tell them, like, ‘I can’t deal with this any more. I’ve been thinking about taking my life,’ and things like that. It didn’t change anything.”

Perhaps as many as 100,000 people were also left out of the refunds because they provided payslips or bank statements after being hit with an initially unlawful debt. It was then recalculated and a debt was substantiated.

And Gordon Legal, which had initially argued these debts were “tainted”, dropped that claim in the settlement.

Some of those people expressed anger and confusion at that outcome in conversations with Guardian Australia this week.

Other refund recipients, like the man who told the Guardian his debt had been a factor in his marriage breakdown, may only get the sense of justice they seek from a royal commission, as proposed by Labor and the Greens.

“I’ve been seeing somebody to actively to talk through, I guess, ‘robodebt-related trauma’ is the way that they put it, and slowly coming to terms with it,” says Kearney, who is now back in Brisbane.

He used to fear another debt might arrive at any moment.

“Now, with the settlement, it does feel like, ‘Everything’s gone back to normal, they’ve made penance … and everything goes good again,’” he says. “Whereas I think a lot of us are still dealing with the impacts of what they did years ago, even if we got our refunds.”. The mother of a robodebt victim who took his own life has told a royal commission that she was stonewalled by the former Coalition government while she sought answers about her son’s welfare debts for more than five years.

The commission is investigating why and how the unlawful Centrelink debt recovery scheme was established in 2015 and ran until November 2019, ending in a $1.8bn settlement with hundreds of thousands of victims.

Jennifer Miller, whose son, Rhys Cauzzo, took his own life on 26 January 2017 while facing Centrelink debts of about $17,000, told the inquiry the government and other authorities had only given her “platitudes” and “false words”.

Miller told the inquiry on Monday she felt vindicated by what had emerged during the royal commission’s investigation.

“I find it extraordinary the lengths they (the Department of Human Services) have been to, to try and get me to stop being so persistent,” Miller told the inquiry.

“It all became very sly. Everyone was lying and covering each other’s backs. Once I saw the all the information … it was both heartbreaking, but also vindicating that we’ve been able to get the truth.”

Miller had written to the former human services minister Alan Tudge – whose response said his department had acted appropriately in the case with only some “minor” administrative errors – as well as the commonwealth ombudsman and Victorian coroner.

The royal commission heard that despite Cauzzo’s pre-existing mental health conditions, there was no “vulnerability indicator” on his Centrelink file. This may have prevented him from receiving those debts and was described by Miller as a “major” rather than “minor” fault.

It was also revealed during the inquiry on Monday that Cauzzo’s debt had been unlawfully calculated using the “income averaging” method, like the hundreds of thousands of other victims of the scheme.

These key facts had been unknown to Miller until the royal commission was able to obtain documents previously withheld from her, the inquiry heard.

Miller said that while her son was “certainly let down by the system”, at times she felt as if she had “let Rhys down” in “not knowing a lot more” about his case.

She described her son as “creative” and, though he had persistent mental health challenges, his suicide came as a great shock to her and those who knew him.

The commission heard that after Cauzzo’s death, Miller found a handwritten note that made reference to suicide with dollar signs and the phrase “debt life” on his fridge. These were pinned alongside five debt notices from the private collection agency Dun and Bradstreet.

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to Morning Mail Free daily newsletter Our Australian morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

Miller told the inquiry she has since learned her son had made an earlier suicide attempt after receiving a debt notice in May 2016.

The inquiry was told he received about a dozen letters from Centrelink throughout 2016 and several letters, text messages and about a dozen phone calls from Dun and Bradstreet between November 2016 and January 2017.

The inquiry also heard on Monday that the department did not provide some documents potentially relevant to Cauzzo’s case to the Victorian coroner, which ultimately declined to hold an inquest into his death.

Services Australia, which was previously the Department of Human Services, was lashed in 2021 by a federal court judge overseeing a class action against robodebt for its continued failure to tell Miller whether her son’s debt was unlawful.

Tudge was questioned earlier this month during the inquiry into his handling of Cauzzo’s case.

An email from an official who worked as a liaison between Tudge’s office and the department said the minister wanted to investigate the case with the intention of telling Miller he had “investigated the matter, and is confident that the Department has done everything correctly (etc)”.

Tudge told the royal commission he sought the investigation because he was concerned and wanted to know what had happened.

Miller said on Monday the former minister’s response was not a “genuine effort” to “give me any information”.

“As far as I’m concerned they were just false words,” she said.

The royal commissioner, Catherine Holmes, thanked Miller for her courage. “It’s a harrowing story,” Holmes said.

The royal commission continues.