. Westfield High School in New Jersey in May 2020. Photo: Rich Graessle/Getty Images

A phone, a few photos and artificial intelligence have stirred controversy and shattered the privacy of several teens at a New Jersey high school after they learned that nude images of them — created via AI — were circulated in group chats. Why it matters: The incident is a poignant example of the threats that come with unregulated, expanding artificial intelligence access, experts told Axios.

Driving the news: Some teen girls at Westfield High School in New Jersey learned last month that fake nude images of them were shared among other students, the Wall Street Journal reported.

Concerns were raised to administrators on Oct. 20, but the photos were shared over the summer, according to an email sent to parents by Westfield High's principal, Mary Asfendis.

The investigation and response involved the Westfield Police Department, in addition to the school's resource officer, counseling department and administration.

Zoom out: Westfield is but one example of an issue all school districts are grappling with as the omnipresence of technology — including artificial intelligence — impacts students' lives, the district's superintendent Raymond González said in a statement.

From January to September of this year, 54% more deepfake pornographic videos were uploaded to website hosts than in all of 2022, Wired reported.

Earlier this year, students in New York State used AI to generate a video of a middle school principal making a racist rant, the Washington Post reported.

Context: Creating deepfakes used to require hundreds of thousands of images of a person, said Hany Farid, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley who has researched digital forensics and image analysis.

One photo is now all it takes to create a deepfake, Farid said, and tools to create these types of images have also become more widely accessible.

Some of them are usable without even inputting a user's personal information, like a phone number, he said.

"What's frustrating is that the people developing these technologies either know or should have known that it's going to be used in this way and are not doing enough to prevent the abuse," he said.

Anyone with a singular photo of themselves on the internet is susceptible to a deepfake getting created, Farid said.

State of play: Deepfake images have hurt people's reputations and have been used for extortion, and experts have been warning about the risks for years.

"It's just going to get worse because the images are getting more realistic," Farid said.

What's next: Technology that determines whether an image is AI-generated already exists, said Edward Delp, a Purdue University professor of electrical and computer engineering.

A future step is adding features that can detect deepfakes to widely used social media platforms and websites to prevent them from being uploaded.

"The sad thing is that once it gets out there, there's going to be a lot of people who believe it's real," Delp said.

Yes, but: When such programs have been used in the past, though, non-sexual material such as breastfeeding guides has been filtered, he said.

Worth noting: Transgressions involving deepfakes are hard to prosecute, despite passed and proposed legislation that has targeted the sharing of explicit faked images and videos.

In Westfield, families of four subjects with deepfakes made of them filed police reports, and a New Jersey senator has asked county prosecutors to look into the high school incident, per the WSJ.

Go deeper: How AI is helping scammers target victims in "sextortion" schemes. CNN —

A student at a New Jersey high school is calling for federal legislation to address AI generated pornographic images after she says photos of her and other female classmates were manipulated and possibly shared online over the summer.

Westfield High School student Francesca Mani, 14, and her mother, Dorota, have expressed frustration over what they say is a lack of legal recourse in place to protect victims of AI-generated pornography.

“In this situation, there was some boys or a boy — that’s to be determined — who created, without the consent of the girls, inappropriate images,” Dorota said, speaking with CNN’s Michael Smerconish Saturday.

Francesca, who said she was among more than 30 female students at Westfield High School whose photos were manipulated and possibly shared publicly, is demanding accountability from the school and local, state, and government officials.

School administrators initially became aware of the incident on October 20 when students informed them the images were created and possibly shared over the summer.

“There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared,” Westfield Principal Mary Asfendis wrote in a letter to students and parents sent on October 20. “At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated. This is a very serious incident.”

Westfield High School has since conducted its own investigation and the Westfield Police Department and the school’s appointed resource officer “were immediately notified and consulted throughout the investigation,” according to school spokesperson Mary Ann McGann. CNN has contacted the Westfield Police Department for comment.

McGann told CNN the school is not able “to provide specific details on the number of students involved and any disciplinary actions imposed, as matters involving students are confidential.”

The school provided CNN with a statement from Superintendent Dr. Raymond González, who said, “All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere.”

González added, “The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond.”

Dorota said she’s proud of her daughter for speaking up and advocating not only for herself, but on behalf of other young girls who have also been victimized by AI generated deepfake pornographic content.

“I think this issue is more complex than just Westfield High School, and this is our time and opportunity to treat it as a teachable platform, to shed the light on this important issue,” she said.

Dorota said her daughter has urged her to see if there are any laws in New Jersey protecting against deepfake images or videos and has also written a letter to President Joe Biden asking him to urge state governors to make sure there are laws in place to protect underage girls and boys.

CNN has reached out to the New Jersey Union County Prosecutor’s Office and the White House for comment.

Intelligence officials in the US have warned about the sharp rise in deepfake videos, which may look convincingly real but are generated using artificial intelligence. In California, bills have been written to combat the use of deepfakes in nonconsensual pornography.

CNN’s Samantha Beech contributed to this report.. 😮 Deepfake porn images were circulated at Westfield High School

😠 Parents want answers. School officials say little.

💻 Incident underscores danger of A.I. technologies

The dangers of artificial intelligence technology have been brought home in Westfield after fake pornographic images of female students were circulated at the local high school.

The images were created using real photos from social media on an AI app that is shockingly easy to access and use. The creation of these types of altered photos are known as 'deepfakes.' In many cases, it is difficult to tell that the photos are not real.

Parents in the district were notified via email from the school principal.

ZIPdatamaps.com/Townsquare Media NJ ZIPdatamaps.com/Townsquare Media NJ loading...

CBS 2 obtained a copy of that email, it reads:

"Earlier today, students brought to our attention that some of our students had used Artificial Intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos. There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared. At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated."

School officials have been notifying the parents of students involved and is asking anyone who believes they are a victim to come forward and to contact Westfield Police.

Parents of the victims say the incident has shaken the female student body and are demanding safeguards be put in place.

attachment-Photo LinkedIn loading...

School Superintendent Dr. Raymond González says the district is already educating students on the dangers of this technology and the harm it can cause to fellow students. He said in statement the district is putting safeguards in place to prevent AI technology from being used or accessed on the school network and school-issued devices.

One parent told the Wall Street Journal her daughter doesn't want to attend school with the boys who were responsible for making and circulating the photos.

While Westfield Police are aware of the incident, they have not commented on any investigation. School officials say they also cannot comment on how many students were effected or any disciplinary actions that have been taken.

Struggles with emerging AI technologies

President Joe Biden signed an executive order on artificial intelligence last week.

"AI is all around us,” Biden said, "To realize the promise of AI and avoid the risk, we need to govern this technology."

The order is an initial step that is meant to ensure that AI is trustworthy and helpful, rather than deceptive and destructive.

Joe Biden, Phil Murphy AP loading...

The order — which will likely need to be augmented by congressional action — seeks to steer how AI is developed so that companies can profit without putting public safety in jeopardy.

Many distrust AI technology

Due to its use to create deepfakes and aid in numerous consumer scams, public distrust in AI is growing.

A new poll from The Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research and the University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy finds a majority of American adults think artificial intelligence tools will increase the spread of false and misleading information in the 2024 presidential election.

FILE - This Feb. 19, 2014, file photo shows the Facebook app icon on an iPhone in New York. A feature rolling out Tuesday, April 5, 2016, on Facebook's iPhone app interprets what's in a photo using a form of artificial intelligence to recognize faces and objects for blind and visually impaired people as they scroll through the pictures posted on the world's largest online social network (AP Photo/Karly Domb Sadof, File) FILE - This Feb. 19, 2014, file photo shows the Facebook app icon on an iPhone in New York. (AP Photo/Karly Domb Sadof, File) loading...

The poll finds that just 30% of adults have used AI chatbots or image generators and fewer than half have heard or read at least some about AI tools.

Yet most adults say they think political candidates using AI for a variety of purposes is a bad idea.

The Associated Press contributed to this article.

NJ 'perv' teachers, coaches busted in the past two years There have been a number of educators, coaches and private teachers facing criminal charges for sexual offenses around New Jersey, between 2023 and 2022 alone. Gallery Credit: Erin Vogt

NJ school districts with the highest median teacher salaries These were the highest median teacher salaries during the 2022-23 school year budget, according to data compiled by the New Jersey Department of Education. We begin with districts whose median salaries are at least $95,000 and work our way up to the highest median salary. Gallery Credit: New Jersey 101.5

Most expensive NJ school systems — by type of district The New Jersey Department of Education separates school districts based on their district and budget type. For example, some districts serve grades K-12 while others are only K-6. Some districts operate only a regional high school or vocational school. In the list below, we reveal the district in each type with the highest per-pupil spending in 2021-22.

Gallery Credit: New Jersey 101.5

Report a correction 👈 | 👉 Contact our newsroom. Students at a New Jersey high school are terrified after learning that one of their classmates allegedly used AI to create sexually explicit images of them without their permission.

Westfield High School student Francesca Mani said that she learned that a male student had used an original picture of her and an artificial intelligence app to create the pornographic images, New York Fox affiliate WNYW reported. The images were allegedly created over the summer, but students only learned about them in October.

“I never thought being like a student, AI didn’t even come to my mind,” Mani told the station. “I just thought it would be like creeps on the internet.”

She reported the incident to the school principal and has learned that it was a group of boys using around a dozen images of girls to make the AI-generated pornography, according to WNYW. The boy was reportedly suspended for a few days but has since returned to the school.

“All the other girls agree with me, they don’t want him in this school,” Mani said. “They are very scared.”

In an email, the school principal said an investigation was ongoing, according to CBS New York affiliate WCBS.

“At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated,” the email said. “This is a very serious incident. We are continuing to investigate and will inform individuals and families of students involved once the investigation is complete.”

The school has reportedly made counseling available, and the Westfield Police Department is also involved, the email said. The principal also included a warning to parents.

“I wanted to make you aware of the situation, as, in addition to harming the students involved and disrupting the school day, it is critically important to talk with your children about their use of technology and what they are posting, saving and sharing on social media,” the email said. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”

CBS also reported that Westfield Superintendent Dr. Raymond González released a statement:

All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere. The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond.

The law surrounding pornographic “deepfakes” such as the ones reported by Mani is not settled. Rep. Joe Morelle, D-N.Y., proposed legislation in May that would make non-consensual sharing of altered or “deepfake” explicit images online illegal, and create legal recourse for victims targeted by such images.

Justice Department officials have said that AI-generated sexually explicit images of children are illegal under federal law.

Neither school officials nor representatives for Westfield police immediately responded to Law&Crime’s request for comment.

Have a tip we should know? [email protected]. WESTFIELD, N.J. -- Parents and students at Westfield High School in New Jersey say students used an app or website to make AI-generated pornographic images of their classmates.

Parents recently got an email from the principal, warning of the dangers of artificial intelligence and saying the complaints from students had sparked an investigation. Some parents turned to the Westfield Police Department.

Dorota Mani, who owns a Jersey City day care, was already worried about the impact artificial intelligence could have on kids.

"AI problem. I would call it 'AI pandemic' at this point," she said.

She says she's even more worried now that her daughter, a Westfield High School student, has become a victim.

"My daughter texted me, 'Mom, naked pictures of me are being distributed.' That's it. Heading to the principal's office," Mani said.

Parents later got the following email from the principal:

"I am writing to make you aware of a situation that resulted in widespread misinformation and resulted in significant worry and concern amongst the student body of Westfield High School. Earlier today, students brought to our attention that some of our students had used Artificial Intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos. There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared. At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated. This is a very serious incident. We are continuing to investigate and will inform individuals and families of students involved once the investigation is complete. This will happen before the weekend. We made counseling available for all affected students and encouraged them to return to class when they felt able to do so. Additionally, our School Resource Officer and the Westfield PD have been made aware of our investigation. If a parent/guardian thinks their child is a victim of a criminal act in relation to this incident please report the matter to Westfield Police. "I wanted to make you aware of the situation, as, in addition to harming the students involved and disrupting the school day, it is critically important to talk with your children about their use of technology and what they are posting, saving and sharing on social media. New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others. "We will continue to educate your children on the importance of responsible use of technology and hope you reinforce these messages at home."

These kinds of altered pictures are known online as "deepfakes."

"She started crying, and then she was walking in the hallways and seeing other girls of Westfield High School crying, some of them victims and some of them just friends of the victims that just felt for them," Mani said.

Mani says she did file a police report.

Police told CBS New York they have no comment.

"It's something that we will need to learn, our children will need to be aware of," Mani said.

Congress is considering a bill introduced by Rep. Joe Morelle, of New York, that would make it illegal to share nonconsensual "deepfake" images online.

Mani and her daughter plan to advocate for laws to protect people from deepfakes.

"Her words -- 'We don't want to wait for a tragedy to happen, we should do something proactively,'" Mani said.

A district spokesperson tells CBS New York the incident happened over the summer but was brought to the attention of school administrators on Oct. 20.

School Superintendent Dr. Raymond González released the following statement:

"All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere. The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond."

The district also says they can't comment on how many students are affected or any disciplinary actions.. Reports indicate that male students at Westfield High School utilized Artificial Intelligence to produce explicit images of female students using their original photos during the summer.

"We were so mad. A lot of girls were crying." — Francesca Mani

Before Oct. 20, Westfield student Francesca Mani never thought her photo would appear online in a deep fake, AI image, but it happened.

" I never thought being like a student, AI didn't even come to my mind. I just thought it would be like creeps on the internet," Mani said.

One of the guys told one of the girls and the next day the girl told all the girls.

Mani didn't know what to do, so she went to the principal's office.

Featured article

Principal Mary Asfendis said at this time, they believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated.

Now, a week and a half later the boy who allegedly made the images was temporarily suspended for a few days, but now he's back in school.

Mani learned it's not just one kid, but a group of boys using upwards of a dozen girl images to make AI pornography.

"Just seeing him in the hallway makes me scared." — Francesca Mani

"All the other girls agree with me, they don't want him in this school. They are very scared," Mani said.

It's a situation so concerning that Mani's mother never thought something like this would happen to her little girl.

Featured article

Now she's advocating for a change in school policy and for this boy to be removed from the school.

" I don't think my daughter, other victims, and the girls of Westfield High School should be punished by another two and a half years of him in the classroom," Mani's mother Dorota said.

The question is how does something like this happen- and how can it be prevented?

"The challenge with this technology is that when it creates a deepfake of you, because it is not actually you, your privacy is not really being violated, although your image has been swapped and changed and another image is being attached to yours to create these very traumatic situations," data AI ethicist Renee Cummings said.

We reached out to the Westfield public schools superintendent who sent FOX 5 a statement saying:

"All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere. The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond."

The police investigation remains ongoing.

If a parent or a guardian thinks their child is a victim of a criminal act in relation to this incident please report the matter to Westfield Police.. Send this page to someone via email

Parents and students of Westfield High in New Jersey are speaking out after a male student or students allegedly used an AI generator to create fake nude images using the faces of female classmates and distributed them in a group chat.

Francesca Mani, 14, is one of more than 30 girls who were victimized in the incident, she says. In a televised interview with CNN, she called on the U.S. government to enact laws to protect victims of AI-generated content.

She also claimed that members of the school community know the student responsible for creating the lewd images, but he has yet to face appropriate consequences.

“So many girls don’t feel comfortable knowing that he’s walking our hallways,” Mani said.

Westfield High stated it could not provide specific details about disciplinary actions taken or the number of students involved, due to privacy reasons. The incident allegedly happened over the summer break, but the school did not become aware of it until Oct. 20.

Story continues below advertisement

On that day, Westfield High School principal Mary Asfendis sent an email to parents about the “very serious incident.”

“There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared,” Asfendis wrote. “At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated.”

According to the Wall Street Journal, which first reported on the incident Saturday, female students learned about the non-consensual images after noticing male classmates in Grade 10 acting “weird” on Oct. 16. A few days later, one boy came forward to say that a classmate had used social media photos of female students to generate fake nude images using an AI-powered website.

A group of female students reported the matter to school administrators. The incident left many of them feeling “humiliated and powerless,” the Journal reported.

The email you need for the day's top news stories from Canada and around the world.

Westfield High said it conducted an investigation into the incident while collaborating with local police. Counselling was provided to students after the matter came to light.

Superintendent Raymond González stated that schools all over “are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere.”

“The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond,” he added.

Story continues below advertisement

Westfield student Mani believes the issue should be dealt with by local police, and that the school should further contribute to making students feel comfortable walking the halls.

Mani’s mother said she’s proud of her daughter for advocating for herself and other girls who have been victimized by deepfake pornographic content.

“I think this issue is more complex than just Westfield High School, and this is our time and opportunity to treat it as a teachable platform, to shed the light on this important issue,” Dorota Mani told CNN.

In recent years, as AI technology has become more accessible, the number of deepfake images and videos on the internet has exploded.

A report from Sensity AI, a company that detects and monitors AI-generated content, found that 96 per cent of deepfake videos online are pornographic.

An AI-powered bot that “strips” people of their clothing was used to create fake nude images of nearly 105,000 women in a one-year time span, the company found. The bot was widely shared on the platform Telegram.

Around 70 per cent of the images created were of private individuals; in other words, not celebrities or public figures.

“Deepfakes continue to pose a threat for individuals and industries, including potential large-scale impacts to nations, governments, businesses, and society,” according to a recent report from the Department of Homeland Security.

Story continues below advertisement

“Experts from different disciplines whose research interests intersect at deepfakes tend to agree that the technology is rapidly advancing, and the high cost of producing top-quality deepfake content is declining. As a result, we expect an emerging threat landscape wherein the attacks will become easier and more successful,” the report adds.

Currently, there are no laws in Canada’s Criminal Code that outright ban the creation and distribution of deepfake pornographic content. However, there is a provision that criminalizes revenge porn, or the non-consensual sharing of intimate images.. . . . . A high-profile incident in which high school students shared artificial intelligence-generated pornographic images of underage classmates has drawn attention to the lack of legal resources for victims of such “deepfakes.”

Although deepfakes have for years now drawn controversy over the creation of pornographic images edited to feature celebrities, the phenomenon gained new relevance for the nonfamous when girls at Westfield High School in New Jersey found out boys were sharing falsified nude photos of them in group chats, as reported by the Wall Street Journal. Parents and school leadership discovered that the law does not provide any clarity about how to handle such a situation.

BIDEN MENTHOL CIGARETTE BAN SLAMMED AS ‘RETRIBUTIVE’ BY BLACK OFFICERS AND DRUG EXPERTS

“Obviously the behavior is unacceptable,” Jake Denton, a research associate at the conservative Heritage Foundation, told the Washington Examiner. “But what are the actual ramifications?”

Faked sexual images are so new for law enforcement that lawmakers have yet to establish legal parameters around the practice. New Jersey does not have a ban on AI-generated pornography, for example.

Several uncertainties apply to the use of such images, Denton noted. For example, is an image considered child pornography if the deepfake attaches the face of an underage girl to the body of an adult woman? How does the average observer determine if the subject of an image is underage or not?

Some states are seeing efforts to write laws, however. A Minnesota law banning the spread of nonconsensual deepfake pornography went into effect in August. Texas has also barred the posting of political deepfakes. California banned both practices in 2019.

Rep. Joe Morelle (D-NY) introduced legislation in June that would make sharing deepfake pornography illegal nationwide and create new legal remedies for victims, though the bill has not advanced.

The spread of AI-generated pornography was noticed when several boys at Westfield were acting “weird” on Oct. 16, according to some of the parents. When some of the girls began asking around, one of them showed them that at least one student had used an AI-powered website to make pornographic images using the girls’ photos online and then sharing them via group chat. The situation was reported to school administrators.

“This is a very serious incident,” Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendi wrote in an email. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”

CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM THE WASHINGTON EXAMINER

At least four of the girls’ parents filed police reports.

Deepfakes are often used to create pornography. Adult content made up 98% of all deepfake content online, according to an analysis from the security firm Home Security Heroes. The technology has also grown cheap enough that a user can create a deepfake pornographic image within 25 minutes at no financial cost.. This October, boys at Westfield High School in New Jersey started acting "weird," the Wall Street Journal reported. It took four days before the school found out that the boys had been using AI image generators to create and share fake nude photos of female classmates. Now, police are investigating the incident, but they're apparently working in the dark, because they currently have no access to the images to help them trace the source.

According to an email that the WSJ reviewed from Westfield High School principal Mary Asfendis, the school "believed" that the images had been deleted and were no longer in circulation among students.

It remains unclear how many students were harmed. A Westfield Public Schools spokesperson cited student confidentiality when declining to tell the WSJ the total number of students involved or how many students, if any, had been disciplined. The school had not confirmed whether faculty had reviewed the images, seemingly only notifying the female students allegedly targeted when they were identified by boys claiming to have seen the images.

It's also unclear if what the boys did was illegal. There is currently no federal law restricting the creation of faked sexual images of real people, the WSJ reported, and in June, child safety experts reported that there was seemingly no way to stop thousands of realistic but fake AI child sex images from being shared online.

This week, President Joe Biden issued an executive order urging lawmakers to pass protections to prevent a wide range of harms, including stopping "generative AI from producing child sexual abuse material or producing non-consensual intimate imagery of real individuals." Biden asked the secretary of Commerce, the secretary of Homeland Security, and the heads of other appropriate agencies to provide recommendations regarding "testing and safeguards against" producing "child sexual abuse material" and "non-consensual intimate imagery of real individuals (including intimate digital depictions of the body or body parts of an identifiable individual), for generative AI." But it could take years before those protections are ultimately introduced, if ever.

Advertisement

Some states have stepped in where federal law is lagging, with Virginia, California, Minnesota, and New York passing laws to outlaw the distribution of faked porn, the WSJ reported. And New Jersey might be next, according to Jon Bramnick, a New Jersey state senator who told the WSJ that he would be "looking into whether there are any existing state laws or pending bills that would criminalize the creation and sharing of" AI-faked nudes. And if he fails to find any such laws, Bramnick said he planned to draft a new law.

It's possible that other New Jersey laws, like those prohibiting harassment or the distribution of child sexual abuse materials, could apply in this case. In April, New York sentenced a 22-year-old man, Patrick Carey, to six months in jail and 10 years of probation "for sharing sexually explicit 'deepfaked' images of more than a dozen underage women on a pornographic website and posting personal identifying information of many of the women, encouraging website users to harass and threaten them with sexual violence." Carey was found to have violated several laws prohibiting harassment, stalking, child endangerment, and "promotion of a child sexual performance," but at the time, the county district attorney, Anne T. Donnelly, recognized that laws were still lacking to truly protect victims of deepfake porn.

"New York State currently lacks the adequate criminal statutes to protect victims of ‘deepfake’ pornography, both adults and children," Donnelly said.

Remarkably, New York moved quickly to close that gap, passing a law last month that banned AI-generated revenge porn, and it appears that Bramnick this week agreed that New Jersey should be next to strengthen its laws.

"This has to be a serious crime in New Jersey," Bramnick said.

Until laws are strengthened, Bramnick has asked the Union County prosecutor to find out what happened at Westfield High School, and state police are still investigating. Westfield Mayor Shelley Brindle has encouraged more victims to speak up and submit reports to the police.

Advertisement

Students targeted remain creeped out

Some of the girls targeted told the WSJ that they were not comfortable attending school with boys who created the images. They're also afraid that the images may reappear at a future point and create more damage, either professionally, academically, or socially. Others have said the experience has changed how they think about posting online.

Last year, Ars warned that AI image generators have become so sophisticated that training AI to create realistic deepfakes is now easier than ever. Some image tools, like OpenAI's DALL-E or Adobe's Firefly, the WSJ report noted, have moderation settings to stop users from creating pornographic images. However, even the best filters are challenging if not "impossible" to enforce, experts told the WSJ, and technology exists to face-swap or remove clothing if someone seeking to create deepfakes is motivated and savvy enough to combine different technologies.

Image-detection firm Sensity AI told the WSJ that more than 90 percent of fake images online are porn. As image generators become more commonplace, the risk of more fake images spreading seems to rise.

For the female students at Westfield High School, the idea that their classmates would target them is more "creepy" than the vague thought that "there are creepy guys out there," the WSJ reported. Until the matter is settled in the New Jersey town, the girls plan to keep advocating for victims, and their principal, Asfendis, has vowed to raise awareness on campus of how to use new technologies responsibly.

“This is a very serious incident,” Asfendis wrote in an email to parents. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images, and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”. AI-generated pornographic images of female students at a New Jersey high school were circulated by male classmates, sparking parent uproar and a police investigation, according a report.

Students at Westfield High School — located in Westfield, a town about 25 miles west of Manhattan where the average household income is $259,377, according to Forbes — told the Wall Street Journal that one or more classmates used an online AI-backed tool to create the racy images and then shared them with peers.

A mother whose daughter is a student at Westfield High School, recounting what her child told her to the Journal, said sophomore boys at the school were acting “weird” on Monday, Oct. 16.

Multiple girls started asking questions, and finally, on Oct. 20, one boy revealed what all the whispering was about: At least one student had used girls’ photos found online to create the fake nudes and then shared them with other boys in group chats, per the Journal.

Several female students were also reportedly told by school administrators that boys had identified them in the fake pornographic images, parents said, though a spokesperson for the high school declined to tell the Journal whether staff members had seen the photos.

5 Fake nude images of female students at Westfield High School in NJ were being circulated among male classmates. Some of the school’s staff members even told girls that they were in the images, according to the Wall Street Journal. Google St View

5 The Westfield Police Department is reportedly looking into the deepfake images. At least one student was involved in generating the images, though it wasn’t clear what AI-backed tool they used. AFP via Getty Images

Another parent, Dorota Mani, said her 14-year-old daughter Francesca was told by the school that her photo was used to generate a fake nude image, known as a “deepfake.”

“I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when. My daughter has a bright future and no one can guarantee this won’t impact her professionally, academically or socially,” Mani told the Journal.

The concerned mother said she doesn’t want her daughter in school with anyone who created the images, and confirmed that she filed a police report.

According to visual threat intelligence company Sensity, more than 90% of deepfake images are pornographic.

Many also use celebrities’ likenesses, such as a recent viral video where an AI-generated deepfake showed supermodel Bella Hadid, whose father is Palestinian, express support for Israel. Earlier this year, deepfake images of Pope Francis in a Balenciaga puffer jacket and Donald Trump resisting arrest also took the internet by storm.

Snap, behind Snapchat, has taken steps to ban such images of minors and report them to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, according to the Journal, though there are close to zero safeguards in place to stop this from happening elsewhere on the internet.

It wasn’t immediately clear which AI website was used to create the pornographic images, though there are many free AI-backed image generators on the internet, including OpenAI’s Dall-E, Adobe’s Firefly and Canva, as well as a slew of lesser-known tools such as Freepik, Wepik, Craiyon and Fotor, just to name a few.

5 Deepfakes have become increasingly realistic. This one of Donald Trump resisting arrest went viral earlier this year. Twitter / Eliot Higgins

Other girls’ parents who spoke to the Journal — including two of the four who filed reports with local police — said they and their daughters hadn’t seen the images in question.

A person familiar with the police investigation said the police haven’t seen the photos either, the Journal reported.

Also on Oct. 20, Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis confirmed the incident to the parents of each of the school’s roughly 1,900 students after girls reported the photos to school administrators.

5 Girls at Westfield High School learned of the fake nude images after many of their male classmates were acting “weird” and whispering last month. The school confirmed the incident in an email to parents. Getty Images

Asfendis also said in the email obtained by the Journal that she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer being circulated.

“This is a very serious incident,” Asfendis penned. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”

She also vowed to continue teaching children about responsible technology use.

5 Deepfake images of Pope Francis in a Balenciaga puffer jacket also went viral earlier this year. TikTok/@vince19visuals

It wasn’t immediately clear how many students were involved in creating the fake nude images, or if any disciplinary action had been taken.

“To be in a situation where you see young girls traumatized at a vulnerable stage of their lives is hard to witness,” Westfield Mayor Shelley Brindle told the Journal of the incident, adding that as the town’s first female mayor, she considers herself an advocate for women and girls.

The Post has sought comment from Westfield High School and the Westfield Police Department.

Just this week, President Biden issued a sweeping executive order that regulates the development of AI, and implements “safeguards against … producing child sexual abuse material and against producing non-consensual intimate imagery of real individuals.”

State officials have outlawed the distribution of AI-generated porn or have given victims the right to sue in civil court in Virginia, California, Minnesota and New York.. Schools AI Made Porn Of Westfield HS Students Prompts Investigation Girls at Westfield High School told school officials after learning boys were sharing fake pornographic images of them in group chats.

Students at Westfield High School made and distributed fake pornographic images of other female students at the school, sparking concern among some parents and prompting officials to investigate the claims, according to officials and reports. (Shutterstock / NickBerryPhotography)

WESTFIELD, NJ — Students at Westfield High School made and distributed fake pornographic images of other female students at the school, sparking concern among some parents and prompting officials to investigate the claims, according to officials and reports.

Girls at the high school recently discovered boys were sharing nude photos of them in group chats after one or more other students used an online tool powered by artificial intelligence to create the images, the Wall Street Journal reported. Dorota Mani told the Journal that her 14-year-old daughter was among the students whose photos were used.

"I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when. My daughter has a bright future and no one can guarantee this won't impact her professionally, academically or socially," Mani told the publication. In a statement provided to Patch, a district spokesperson confirmed the incident happened over the summer and was brought to the attention of school officials last month. The district conducted an "immediate investigation," according to the spokesperson, and notified Westfield police.



The district spokesperson declined to provide details on the number of students involved or confirm if any disciplinary actions had been taken, citing confidentiality reasons. One parent told the Wall Street Journal that some of the sophomore boys were acting "weird" in the days leading up to school officials learning about the photos. On Oct. 20, a boy told some of the girls about the photos, who then told administrators.

Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis addressed the photos in an email sent to parents the same day.

"This is a very serious incident," Asfendis wrote in the email obtained by Patch. "New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others."



In the email, Asfendis told parents she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer being circulated. She added, "We will continue to educate your children on the importance of responsible use of technology and hope you reinforce these messages at home."

At least two families filed reports with the Westfield Police Department, according to the Journal. A police spokesperson did not respond to Patch's request for comment.

So-called "deepfake porn" is becoming increasingly common, according to research conducted by the University of Pennsylvania. Deepfake porn is visual content created using AI technology, which anyone can access through apps and websites.

According to UPenn researcher Sophie Maddocks, the technology uses algorithms that are trained to remove clothes from images of women and replace them with pictures of naked body parts.

According to an NBC News report, 96 percent of deepfake images are sexually explicit and feature women who didn't consent to the creation of the content. At a national level, President Joe Biden on Monday signed an executive order targeting artificial intelligence that seeks to balance the needs of technology companies with national security and consumer rights. Before signing the order, Biden said AI is driving change at "warp speed" and carries tremendous potential as well as perils. "AI is all around us," Biden said. "To realize the promise of AI and avoid the risk, we need to govern this technology." The order is an initial step to ensure that AI is trustworthy and helpful rather than deceptive and destructive. The order — which will likely need to be augmented by congressional action — seeks to steer how AI is developed so that companies can profit without putting public safety in jeopardy.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.. WESTFIELD, N.J. (WCBS) – Some New Jersey high school students are accused of sharing AI-generated nude photos of their classmates.

The incident happened over the summer but was just recently brought to the attention of administrators at Westfield High School.

Dorota Mani plans to advocate for her daughter, who is a high schooler that became a victim of these deepfakes.

“My daughter texted me, ‘Mom, naked pictures of me are being distributed.’ That’s it. ‘Heading to the principal’s office,’” Mani said.

Mani said her daughter started crying and saw fellow classmates walking in the hallways who were also crying.

Parents later got an email from the principal, reading in part:

“Students brought to our attention that some of our students had used artificial intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos. The kind of altered pictures known online as deepfakes.”

The principal’s email went on to warn parents:

“New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and dangers those actions can cause to others.”

The email also encouraged victims to contact the police, and Mani said she did file a police report.

The school district said they can’t comment on how many students are affected or any disciplinary actions that are being taken.

Congress is considering a bill introduced by representative Joe Morelle of New York that would make it illegal to share non-consensual deepfake images online.

Mani and her daughter plan to advocate for laws to protect people from deepfakes.

“It’s something that we will need to learn, our children will need to be aware of,” Mani said.

Copyright 2023 WCBS via CNN Newsource. All rights reserved.. A New Jersey high school has been plunged into crisis after male students were caught sharing AI-generated nudes of their female classmates.

Some male students in the sophomore class of Westfield High School in New Jersey used an AI-powered website to generate pornographic images of their classmates using girls' photos found online.

One of the victims, Francesca Mani, who is just 14, has filed a police report.

'At first I cried, and then I decided I should not be sad. I should be mad and should advocate for myself and the other victims,' Mani told the Wall Street Journal.

Her mother, Dorota Mani, told the publication: 'I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when. My daughter has a bright future and no one can guarantee this won't impact her professionally, academically or socially.'

Male students at Westfield High School in New Jersey (pictured) used an AI-powered website to generate pornographic images of their classmates

Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis alerted parents to the situation in an email on October 20

Another victim said: 'We're aware that there are creepy guys out there but you'd never think one of your classmates would violate you like this.'

Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis alerted parents to the situation in an email on October 20.

'This is a very serious incident,' Asfendis wrote.

'New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.'

Asfendis said she believed the images had now been deleted and were no longer being circulated.

A spokesperson for Westfield Public Schools told the Journal they would not provide details on the number of students involved or confirm whether any disciplinary action had been taken, due to student confidentiality.

'To be in a situation where you see young girls traumatized at a vulnerable stage of their lives is hard to witness,' Westfield's first female Mayor Shelley Brindle told the publication.

More than 90% of such false imagery known as 'deep fakes' are porn, according to image-detection firm Sensity AI.

States, including Virginia, California, Minnesota and New York, have outlawed the distribution of faked porn or given victims the right to sue its creators in civil court however experts believe federal law is failing to keep up with technological changes of this sort.

'This has to be a serious crime in New Jersey,' Jon Bramnick, a New Jersey state senator whose district includes Westfield told the Journal.. . (NewsNation) — A nude photo controversy has a New Jersey community demanding answers.

High school students say they were stunned to learn inappropriate photos of them were circulating among their classmates — and that the images were completely fake.

“This is cyberbullying and bullying at the next level,” AI advisor and business strategist Marva Bailer said.

A group of boys at Westfield High School in New Jersey have been accused of using artificial intelligence (AI) to generate pornographic pictures of female students at the school and then sharing them in group chats. Police are now investigating, but experts say this kind of problem is only becoming more prevalent.

“These boys think they’re having fun and making these creations, and it’s not real photography, but it’s a real image and likeness of these girls, and it’s putting them in a scenario and a situation that is causing them harm and probably mental distress,” Bailer said.

Dorota Mani’s daughter was one of the students targeted with the fake nudes. She told NewsNation she is disappointed by how the school handled the situation.

“I’m very disappointed as a parent of Westfield High School. I believe the way that it has been handled is just unacceptable on many levels. Nobody has been suspended,” she said.

A school spokesperson told NewsNation the school could not provide specific details on the investigation or results. The incident reportedly happened over the summer but did not come to the school’s attention until October.

“The WHS Counseling Department met individually with students seeking support and WHS administration and counseling department met with the entire grade level in small groups to discuss the incident, provide support, and detail district policies related to inappropriate use of technology,” the statement said.

Mani said her daughter feels betrayed by the school and how the incident has been handled. She said her daughter felt uncomfortable at school after the fake nudes were circulated, but the school told Mani there was nothing more that could be done.

The Westfield Public Schools superintendent released a statement to local media:

“All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond.”

Bailer said she wasn’t surprised that people were taking advantage of AI technology to harm others when they think it’s a joke.

“It’s not a joke,” she said.

According to Sensity AI, which offers deepfake detection services, 90% of all deepfakes on the internet are pornography. Experts say child pornography in particular is a growing problem, as online AI tools are increasingly available for free with little more than a Google search.

“Now, in the digital age we live in, information is moving so quickly and the trust factor because you’re looking at it so quickly. You trust everything. Once it’s out there, it’s out there, and so it is going to be very, very challenging for law enforcement to find bad actors,” Bailer said.

Earlier this week, President Joe Biden signed an executive order on artificial intelligence. He said, “To realize the promise of AI and avoid the risk, we need to govern this technology.”. "You’d never think one of your classmates would violate you like this."

Question Mark

After AI-generated nudes of teen girls began circulating in a New Jersey high school, neither parents, school officials nor even local law enforcement have been able to figure out how to deal with it.

As the Wall Street Journal reports, girls at a school in the affluent New York City suburb of Westfield learned weeks ago in October that AI-manipulated images of them were being shared in group chats by boys at their school. But thus far, there hasn't been much in the way of punishment — and it's still unclear who even made the fake nudes to begin with.

When reached by the WSJ, a spokesperson Westfield High School confirmed that the incident had taken place, but declined to name any students involved to protect confidentiality. In one email sent on October 20, school principal Mary Asfendis called the debacle a "very serious incident," and said that she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer in circulation.

The parents of the girls involved also took the situation to local police and even their state senator, but they don't seem to know what to do either. That's likely because, as the WSJ acknowledges, the dark side of AI — which now allows people to digitally "undress" unwitting subjects or create phony nudes of them with little more than an iPhone — has progressed much faster than the law.

Slow Roll

Thus far, there are only a handful of states, including New York, that have enacted laws that ban the distribution of faked porn or give those portrayed in them the right to civil lawsuits. Both the White House and the state of New Jersey have in recent weeks announced the creation of AI task forces generally, but those are more exploratory in nature, and any laws stemming from them will take a long time to enact.

For the girls of Westfield, whose plight is jarringly similar to a situation that happened in Spain in September, it's unclear whether there will be any resolution and what it might look like. Some of them are uncomfortable with having to attend school with the people they suspect created and shared the images, who seem to have not yet faced any consequences.

"We’re aware that there are creepy guys out there," one of the victims said during a meeting of impacted girls and their parents that the WSJ was granted access to, "but you’d never think one of your classmates would violate you like this."

More on abusive AI: South Korea Sentences Man for Creating Child Abuse Images Using AI. The sharing of explicit AI-generated images of high school students has triggered an uproar in an affluent New York City suburb and left the teens, parents, school, and police wondering how they can address the violations given what the Wall Street Journal describes as a "lack of clarity on such images' legality." Federal law has yet to address faked sexual images of real people, which have exploded across the internet with the release of innovative artificial intelligence tools. It takes just a single photo to create a faked image or "deepfake," per Axios . And more than 90% of deepfakes are pornographic, according to image-detection firm Sensity AI, per the Journal. Only a handful of states have outlawed the sharing of pornographic deepfakes or given victims the right to sue creators, per the Journal.

One or more male students at Westfield High School in New Jersey altered existing photos of classmates available online into pornographic images using an AI tool, per the Journal. The highly realistic images, nearly impossible to differentiate from real photographs, were then shared with other boys at school. In an Oct. 20 email to parents, Principal Mary Asfendis said she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer circulating, per CBS News. A Westfield Public Schools rep declined to say how many students were involved or whether any faced discipline, citing student confidentiality. Though Westfield police are investigating, it's unclear if officers will find a violation of the law.

State Sen. Jon Bramnick, whose district includes Westfield, is reviewing state laws to see if any criminalize the creation and sharing of deepfakes. If they don't, he plans to draft a bill to that effect. "This has to be a serious crime in New Jersey," he tells the Journal, noting he's asked the Union County Prosecutor's Office to investigate. The Biden administration has also called for blocking AI-generated child sexual-abuse images and "non-consensual intimate imagery of real individuals," per the Journal. Dorota Mani, whose daughter's photo was altered, says she's "terrified" the images will surface and affect 14-year-old Francesca "professionally, academically or socially" down the line. "You'd never think one of your classmates would violate you like this," says Francesca. (More deepfakes stories.). For free real time breaking news alerts sent straight to your inbox sign up to our breaking news emails Sign up to our free breaking news emails Please enter a valid email address Please enter a valid email address SIGN UP I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy notice Thanks for signing up to the

Breaking News email {{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

An investigation is underway after teen girls at a New Jersey high school discovered that their male classmates had used artificial intelligence websites to create fake nudes of them, which the teen boys then shared and circulated.

Parents at Westfield High School alerted authorities in their affluent town after their daughters learned about the “deep fake” nudes on 20 October. The girls had suspected that their classmates had been hiding something, but it wasn’t until one of the Sophomore classmates allegedly admitted to having received the fake nudes that they realised the scope of the situation.

“I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when. My daughter has a bright future and no one can guarantee this won’t impact her professionally, academically or socially,” Dorota Mani, whose 14-year-old daughter’s photo was used to create one of the AI-generated nudes, told The Wall Street Journal.

At a conference between local legislators and families impacted by the incident, Ms Mani’s daughter said that the girls in her class felt humiliated and some even opted to delete their social media, the WSJ reports. The female students have not seen the photos that their classmates shared in group chats and the high school declined to confirm to the WSJ whether school administrators had reviewed those conversations.

The Independent has reached out to Westfield High School and local police for comment.

“We’re aware that there are creepy guys out there,” Ms Mani’s daughter reportedly said during the meeting. “...but you’d never think one of your classmates would violate you like this.”

It is believed the teen boys used AI-powered online tools to create the deep fakes. It is still unclear whether they will face any disciplinary action.

“This is a very serious incident,” principal Mary Asfendis said in an email addressed to parents and obtained by the WSJ. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”

Four families have already filed reports with police, but the number of students whose pictures were used remains unknown.

In the last few years, the use of AI has prompted concerns about the spread of disinformation. Porn created using the technology now makes up for more than 90per cent of “deepfakes” circulating online, per drau-detecting firm Sensity AI.

Yet, the legislation in place to curb the misuse of AI is still new and insufficient. On Thursday, the UK held a two-day summit with international leaders in attendance, where officials tried to lay a foundation for laws in AI regulation.

Earlier this year, TikTok said that all deepfakes or manipulated content that show realistic scenes must be labelled to indicate they’re fake or altered and that deepfakes of private figures and young people are no longer allowed. Meta, as well as adult sites like OnlyFans and Pornhub, also participated in an online tool, called Take It Down, that allows teens to report explicit images and videos of themselves from the internet.

Some of the most used image generators don’t allow users to create pornographic images, according to the WSJ, but alternatives are easily available online.

While it is still too early to determine what legal pathways are available for students at Westfield High School, intellectual property attorney Natalie Elizarof told the WSJ that child sex abuse laws may apply in this situation.

“To be in a situation where you see young girls traumatized at a vulnerable stage of their lives is hard to witness,” Westfield Mayor Shelley Brindle told the WSJ.. . High School AI Scandal Prompts Police Investigation and Calls for Legal Reform

KEY HIGHLIGHTS AI-generated fake nudes at a New Jersey high school trigger police investigation and legal action.

Students and faculty at Westfield High advocate for responsible AI use following a disturbing misuse incident.

New Jersey lawmakers consider new legislation to criminalize AI abuse in the wake of high school scandal.



A troubling scenario unfolded at Westfield High School in New Jersey, reported by the Wall Street Journal , as AI technology was misappropriated by teenage boys to create and distribute fake nude images of their female classmates. This reprehensible use of AI has led to a police probe, a school in distress, and a broader discussion on the need for legal frameworks to combat such digital abuses.

The Incident that Shook Westfield High

In the quiet town of New Jersey, high school students found themselves at the center of a sinister technological misuse. Boys had leveraged advanced AI image generators, tools designed for creativity, to craft and circulate non-consensual fake nudes of fellow female students. The incident, which remained undetected for days, has raised profound concerns regarding the misuse of AI and the lack of adequate deterrents or legal protections against such acts.

Legal Loopholes and the Quest for Justice

The legal landscape is scrambling to catch up with the pace of technology. With no federal law explicitly forbidding the creation of sexualized fake images, the path to justice for the victims remains murky. However, states like Virginia and California have enacted laws against such practices, and New Jersey may follow suit, spurred by the recent events at Westfield High.

The Reaction: Enforcement and Education

Law Enforcement's Challenge: Police are currently investigating without access to the images, complicating their ability to trace the origins.

Police are currently investigating without access to the images, complicating their ability to trace the origins. School's Response: Principal Mary Asfendis's communications highlight the school's actions, from addressing the deletion of the images to educating the student body on the consequences of such misuse of technology.

Principal Mary Asfendis's communications highlight the school's actions, from addressing the deletion of the images to educating the student body on the consequences of such misuse of technology. Legislative Action: New Jersey State Senator Jon Bramnick's commitment to drafting new laws, if necessary, to criminalize the creation and sharing of AI-generated fake nudes.

Implications for the Students

The psychological impact on the female students targeted is profound. With feelings of discomfort and fears of long-term repercussions, the incident has altered the way they perceive safety and privacy within educational spaces. It has also changed their approach to social media and online presence.

The Larger Picture: AI's Ethical Dilemma

The case at Westfield High is not an isolated one. AI image generators are becoming increasingly sophisticated, and while companies like OpenAI and Adobe implement moderation settings, the enforcement remains a significant challenge. Experts argue that stronger filters are tough, if not impossible, to impose effectively.

The Call for Responsible AI Use

The incident has ignited a movement among the students and faculty at Westfield High to advocate for responsible use of AI technologies. Principal Asfendis's pledge to raise awareness marks the beginning of what could be a widespread educational effort to prevent such abuses of technology.. Crime & Safety Westfield Student Accused Of Making AI Porn Returns To School: Reports A district spokesperson told Patch the incident happened over the summer and was brought to the attention of school officials last month.

Girls at the high school recently discovered boys were sharing nude photos of them in group chats after one or more other students used an online tool powered by artificial intelligence to create the images, the Wall Street Journal reported. (Shutterstock)

WESTFIELD, NJ — A Westfield High School student accused of using artificial intelligence to make fake pornographic images of female students at the school was suspended but has since returned to school, one of the victims and her mother told multiple outlets including Good Morning America.

Girls at the high school recently discovered boys were sharing nude photos of them in group chats after one or more other students used an online tool powered by artificial intelligence to create the images, the Wall Street Journal reported. The school offered counseling to its affected students and school officials say they’re still investigating the situation, according to News12 New Jersey. So far, only the one student has been punished, Good Morning America reported Monday.



Dorota Mani told Good Morning America that her 14-year-old daughter was among the students whose photos were used and that she has filed a police report. 'I just feel very uncomfortable and very scared like a lot of others,' Mani's daughter, Francesca, told Good Morning America.

Mani added that she and her mother "just don't think it's right that he's walking the hallways." "I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when," Mani told The Wall Street Journal. "My daughter has a bright future and no one can guarantee this won't impact her professionally, academically, or socially."

In a statement provided to Patch, a district spokesperson confirmed the incident happened over the summer and was brought to the attention of school officials last month. The district conducted an "immediate investigation," according to the spokesperson, and notified Westfield police. The district spokesperson declined to provide details on the number of students involved or confirm if any disciplinary actions had been taken, citing confidentiality reasons.

One parent told the Wall Street Journal that some of the sophomore boys were acting "weird" in the days leading up to school officials learning about the photos. On Oct. 20, a boy told some of the girls about the photos, who then told administrators. Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis addressed the photos in an email sent to parents the same day. "This is a very serious incident," Asfendis wrote in the email obtained by Patch. "New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others." In the email, Asfendis told parents she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer being circulated. She added, "We will continue to educate your children on the importance of responsible use of technology and hope you reinforce these messages at home."

At least two families filed reports with the Westfield Police Department, according to the Journal. A police spokesperson did not immediately respond to Patch's request for comment. So-called "deepfake porn" is becoming increasingly common, according to research conducted by the University of Pennsylvania. Deepfake porn is visual content created using AI technology, which anyone can access through apps and websites. According to UPenn researcher Sophie Maddocks, the technology uses algorithms that are trained to remove clothes from images of women and replace them with pictures of naked body parts. According to an NBC News report, 96 percent of deepfake images are sexually explicit and feature women who didn't consent to the creation of the content. At a national level, President Joe Biden signed an executive order last week targeting artificial intelligence that seeks to balance the needs of technology companies with national security and consumer rights.

Before signing the order, Biden said AI is driving change at "warp speed" and carries tremendous potential as well as perils. "AI is all around us," Biden said. "To realize the promise of AI and avoid the risk, we need to govern this technology." The order is an initial step to ensure that AI is trustworthy and helpful rather than deceptive and destructive. The order — which will likely need to be augmented by congressional action — seeks to steer how AI is developed so that companies can profit without putting public safety in jeopardy. The Associated Press contributed to this report. Megan VerHelst contributed reporting.. A teen girl and her mother are speaking out after a high school student allegedly used artificial intelligence to create nude images of her and other girls, which were then shared with a group of classmates.

Francesca Mani, 14, learned about the images in October, when she was called into her principal's office at Westfield High School and told she was one of the victims of fake artificial intelligence-generated nude photos that were created by a male classmate.

"I realized I should not be sad, but I should be mad. So, I came home, and I told my mom, and I told her that we have to do something about this because it is unfair to girls, and it's just not right," Francesca, a sophomore, told "Good Morning America."

Dorota Mani, Francesca's mother, told "GMA" she was shocked when she first heard of the incident, but then jumped into action.

"My initial feeling, obviously, was shock to hear such a thing from your daughter," Mani recalled.

Westfield High School in Westfield, N.J. WABC

Mani said she filed a police report and reached out to an official at Francesca's school, who informed her the photos had been distributed via Snapchat.

"[The official] also mentioned that I should not worry because Snapchat only lasts for three to five seconds, which we all know you can save it, you can screenshot it, somebody else can take a picture of that picture," Mani said.

Mani said she believes the alleged fake AI-generated images were shared over the summer between several boys, who are Westfield students, but said the school didn't find out about it until recently.

Westfield High School Principal Mary Asfendis sent a letter to parents recently, writing in part, "Students brought to our attention that some of our students had used Artificial Intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos … At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated. This is a very serious incident. We are continuing to investigate."

According to Dorota and Francesca Mani, only one male schoolmate has served a short suspension related to the incident, and they say he has since returned to school.

"I just feel very uncomfortable and very scared," Francesca said. "A lot of other girls agree with me. We just don't think it's right that he's walking the hallways."

The Manis say they have not seen the fake AI-generated images and don't know of any other alleged victims who have seen them. ABC News has not been able to confirm whether these images exist.

New Jersey has strict laws against sexually explicit depictions of minors, including fake images, according to experts.

"The fact that the perpetrators are minors might mean that there's leniency here or certain types of attempts to keep them out of the incarceration system, but that wouldn't mean that they could not be punished at all," Mary Anne Franks, a law professor at George Washington University, told "GMA."

Mani said this incident is a reminder to talk to children.

"This is a moment where we should be teaching our girls and Westfield High School that they're worth it to fight for. What has happened [is] not OK, and we should be teaching our boys that there will be consequences," Mani said.

Westfield High School is also encouraging parents to talk to kids about what they are posting, saving and sharing on social media.. WESTFIELD, N.J. (WCBS/CNN/CNN Newsource/WKRC) - High school students were accused of circulating AI-generated explicit photos of their classmates.

The incident happened over the summer in Westfield, New Jersey, but was only recently brought to the attention of school administrators. WCBS reporters spoke with a parent at the school, who planned to advocate with her daughter for laws to protect people from so-called "deepfakes."

Dorota Mani, an owner at a New Jersey city daycare, told the station she was concerned with the potential impact artificial intelligence could have on kids.



"AI problem? I would call it AI pandemic at this point," Mani told WCBS.



Mani told the outlet she was more worried now that her daughter, a high school student, has become a victim.

"My daughter texted me, 'mom, naked pictures of me are being distributed.' That's it. Heading to the principal's office," Mani told the station.

According to WCBS, parents received an email from the principal which read in part: "Students brought to our attention that some of our students had used artificial intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos. The kind of altered pictures known online as deepfakes."

"She started crying, and she's seen other girls of Westfield High School crying, some of them victims and some of them just friends of the victims that just felt for them," Mani told the station.

The principal went on to warn parents that "new technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and dangers those actions can cause to others."

The email encouraged parents of the victims to contact the police, and Mani told WCBS she had filed a report. The police department told the station that it had no comment.

"It's something that we will need to learn, our children will need to be aware of," Mani explained to WCBS's reporters.



Congress is considering a bill, which was introduced by Representative Joe Morelle of New York, that would make it illegal to share non-consensual deepfake images online.

The school district told WCBS that it couldn't comment on any disciplinary action taken. Mani and her daughter told the outlet that they planned to advocate for better laws to protect people from deepfakes.



. Deepfake porn is running rampant, and a New Jersey high school is one of the latest epicenters.

Police are investigating after boys at Westfield High School circulated AI-generated images that showed the faces of their female classmates on naked bodies. It’s unclear if the perpetrators will be punished due to questions around the legality of their transgression: Neither federal law nor most state laws have anything on the books about deepfake porn. Plus, it may not be divulged if they are punished due to student confidentiality. In the meantime, a New Jersey state senator asked county prosecutors to take notice.

Widespread and rising: More than 90% of online deepfakes are pornographic, according to the image-detection firm Sensity AI. As of September, creeps had already uploaded 54% more deepfake porn videos this year than in all of 2022, Wired reported.

In other recent instances, a stranger virtually undressed a woman’s Instagram mirror selfie, a Wisconsin man threatened minors with nude deepfakes, and more than 30 girls in Spain were targeted by classmates with fake nudes.

How is this happening? Though big-name image generators like OpenAI’s Dall-E and Adobe’s Firefly have guardrails that stop users from making porn, countless online face-swapping and undressing tools that use publicly available software are still out there, making it hard to shut them down.—ML. NEW YORK (1010 WINS/WCBS 880) – Boys from New Jersey’s Westfield High School shared fake, AI-generated nude photos of female classmates in group chats over the summer, 1010 WINS/WCBS 880 confirmed.

According to students, one or more of their male classmates utilized an online artificial intelligence tool to make the lewd images before circulating them around the high school community.

The Westfield Public Schools administration was not aware of the images until Oct. 20, according to an email the district sent 1010 WINS/WCBS 880.

Once the situation was uncovered, Westfield High School conducted an immediate investigation based on the district’s Student Code of Conduct, and notified the Westfield Police Department, the district confirmed.

On the same day high school officials discovered the incident, Mary Asfendis, principal of Westfield High School, sent an email to parents.

The email briefed families on the situation and encouraged parents to contact the Westfield Police Department if they believed their child was a victim of a criminal act in relation to the incident.

“I wanted to make you aware of the situation, as, in addition to harming the students involved and disrupting the school day, it is critically important to talk with your children about their use of technology and what they are posting, saving and sharing on social media,” Asfendis wrote in the email.

“New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others,” she continued.

The district confirmed that the Westfield High School Counseling Department met individually with students seeking support in addition to meeting with the entire grade level in small groups to discuss the incident and detail district technology policies.

According to Dorota Mani, the mother of one of the victims, a 14-year-old girl, these shows of support are not enough.

“Their female population, their students, are very upset and uncomfortable. And they are doing nothing to make them feel better,” Mani told 1010 WINS/WCBS 880.

Mani said that 34 girls were called into the office in relation to this incident, and that Principal Asfendis told her there is one boy suspected of creating the images.

The district refused to provide specific details regarding the number of students involved and any disciplinary actions imposed, citing student confidentiality.

“All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere,” Westfield Public Schools Superintendent Dr. Raymond González wrote in an email to 1010 WINS/WCBS 880.

“We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond,” González said.

The rise in free AI tools has resulted in the increased spread of deepfake images across social media, with visual threat intelligence company Sensity reporting that more than 90% of these images are pornographic.

The precedent for legislative options regarding those impacted by AI-powered, false images doesn’t yet exist, leaving lawmakers determined to define rules regarding AI.

1010 WINS/WCBS 880 spoke with New Jersey State Senator John Bramnick, who said that “We want to make sure that our statutes make this a serious offense, right now it might be limited to some sort of harassment.”

As female students attempt to heal from this situation, Dorota Mani offers some hope.

“Under the circumstances she is doing very good,” Mani said of her daughter. “I have a firecracker at home. She’s opinionated, she’s strong, she’s independent.”. A New Jersey Westfield High School student, Francesca Mani, has come forward with her mother, Dorota, to address AI-generated pornographic images that she says were manipulated and shared of her and other female classmates over the summer.

According to CNN, the 14-year-old is calling for federal legislation to protect victims of AI-generated porn.

“In this situation, there was some boys or a boy — that’s to be determined — who created, without the consent of the girls, inappropriate images,” Dorota told the outlet on Nov. 4.

The high schooler said that more than 30 female students were victims of AI-generated images that were allegedly manipulated and released to the public.

The student and her mother are looking for the school and local and state government officials to take accountability for the situation.

Since becoming aware of the matter on Oct. 20, the school has launched an investigation, with consultation from the Westfield Police Department.

“There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared,” said Westfield Principal Mary Asfendis in a letter to students and parents addressing the matter on Oct. 20.

“At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated. This is a very serious incident.”

“All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere,” Superintendent Dr. Raymond González said in a statement.

On April 27, NPR reported that policymakers had already addressed concerns regarding nonconsensual deepfake pornography.

According to Merriam-Webster Dictionary, a “deepfake” is “an image or recording that has been convincingly altered and manipulated to misrepresent someone as doing or saying something that was not actually done or said.”

“Laws and regulation will have to play a role, at least in some of the highest-risk areas,” said WilmerHale attorney Matthew Ferraro, an expert in legal issues around AI.

Ten states, including Texas and California, have already created policies that ban deepfakes, especially pornography. The European Union has already stepped into action by creating the AI Act to set rules and regulations on how AI can be used.

BLACK ENTERPRISE recently reported that the Biden administration has taken steps toward preventing potential AI risks through its Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. The executive order took effect on Oct. 30.

RELATED CONTENT: AI Chatbots In Healthcare: Potential For Improved Care, But Research Reveals Racial Bias. Westfield High School in Westfield, New Jersey, dates back to 1864, but it’s been a fixture on Dorian Road since 1951. With nearly 2000 students enrolled today, the district has dealt with all kinds of issues over the years, but perhaps few as daunting and diabolical as what happened last month.

Girls at Westfield High School are reeling from fellow students digitally creating and then sharing nude photographs of them – “deepfakes” that take existing legitimate images of their faces found elsewhere and superimpose nude bodies on the teens with the use of artificial intelligence.

Westfield Mayor Shelley Brindle told the Wall Street Journal, “To be in a situation where you see young girls traumatized at a vulnerable stage of their lives is hard to witness.”girls

Doroto Mani is mother to 14-year-old Francesca, a student whose image was one of the photographs exploited and distributed.

“I am terrified by how this is going to surface and when,” she said. “My daughter has a bright future, and no one can guarantee this won’t impact her professionally, academically or socially.”

In recent years, some readers may remember examples of “deepfakes” being shared online, notably one video purportedly featuring actor Tom Cruise. It was entertaining, convincing – and downright dangerous.

Digital technology experts and plenty of others have been warning about the potential for artificial intelligence to cause chaos and even outright catastrophe.

Media magnate Elon Musk has been one of those sounding the alarm.

“The consequences of AI going wrong are severe, so we have to be proactive rather than reactive,” Musk told reporters in September.

“The question is really one of civilizational risk. It’s not like … one group of humans versus another. It’s like, hey, this is something that’s potentially risky for all humans everywhere.”

When asked whether it could destroy mankind, Musk was blunt.

“There is some chance that is above zero that AI will kill us all. I think it’s low. But if there’s some chance, I think we should also consider the fragility of human civilization.”

Rather than worrying about A.I. obliterating humanity on earth, parents are understandably concerned about it destroying their child’s reputation and emotional stability.

What can be done?

State lawmakers should be making the creation and distribution of fake pornography illegal, as well as crafting legislation that makes it feasible for victims to sue the creator who exploits them. To date, only four states have done so – New York, California, Virginia, and Minnesota. There’s no good reason why the other 46 states shouldn’t follow suit.

Some have suggested existing laws banning child pornography could apply in the case of Westfield High School, but what type of prosecutorial power those hold remains to be fully tested and seen. Earlier this week, the Biden Administration issued a 111-page executive order “on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence.” Part of the intent was to prohibit the creation of “non-consensual intimate imagery of real individuals” – especially children.

Of course, one of the main challenges is that all that’s needed to create the filth that harms and exploits someone is a phone, a device that most high school students possess these days.

Parents must remain vigilant, maintaining access to their children’s devices – and educating them on the dangers of posting even innocent photos on social media that could be used to try and manipulate and harm them.

Ironically, the Westfield High School mascot is the “Blue Devil” – a term often associated with low spirits, despondency, and melancholy. Yet another derivation dates to World War I and French soldiers nicknamed “les Diables Bleus.” They became famous for their toughness and success battling in the Alps.

Despite the ominous signs and circumstances, Christian parents and teens are called upon to fight back with similar tenaciousness. We need to teach our sons and daughters about sexual purity, mutual respect, and goodness. Laws may punish and deter, but the very best way to prevent this wicked wildfire is to shape and nurture the next generation.

Photo from Shutterstock.. A New Jersey high school has been rocked by scandal after male students reportedly used AI to create fake nude photos of female students.



Chase to share customer data with advertisers CC Share Subtitles Off

English view video Chase to share customer data with advertisers

Last month, some teen girls at Westfield High School learned that fake nude images of them had been circulated among other students over the summer, the Wall Street Journal reported. In an email to parents, school principal Mary Asfendis called the debacle a “very serious incident,” saying she believed the images had been deleted and were no longer in circulation, according to Ars Technica.

But so far, there hasn’t been much in the way of resolution. The school, citing confidentiality, won’t share how many people are affected. Nor has it disclosed whether the students behind the deepfakes have been caught and will face disciplinary action.

Advertisement

This isn’t an isolated incident. Something similar happened in Spain in September. Also, public personalities, including congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Hollywood star Scarlett Johansson, and several YouTubers and Twitch streamers, have found themselves caught up in deepfake pornography scandals.

Advertisement

Meanwhile, New Jersey has no law to penalize makers and distributors of AI-generated nudes. On Oct. 10, governor Phil Murphy announced an AI task force, saying it “will not only work to understand the benefits of AI but also analyze its growth and potential risks.” However, a law calling out offenders eludes New York’s neighboring state.

Advertisement

Snapshot: No federal law against deepfake nudes

US president Joe Biden’s expansive executive order on AI regulation, issued on Oct. 30, lays out guidelines for monitoring and detection, setting up guardrails, and investing in tech tools but does not implement a nationwide law.

Advertisement

Quotable: Federal deepfake legislation is complicated



“If there is federal deepfake legislation passed that specifically targets pornographic deepfakes, then, in order to be constitutional, pornographic deepfakes may need to fit into the First Amendment categorical exception of being a separate category like child pornography....[T]here is no clear solution. At the very least, before substantive federal legislation is passed, researchers need to conduct more studies to learn about the impact that pornographic deepfakes have on victims and internet users.” —Bradley Waldstreicher, associate editor, Cardozo Law Review, May 2021

AI-generated fake nudes, by the digits

290%: How much fake nudes have ballooned since 2018 on the top 10 websites that host AI-generated porn photos, the Washington Post reported, citing industry analyst Genevieve Oh

Advertisement

143,000: AI-generated porn videos added in 2023 across the 40 most popular websites for faked videos—a figure that surpasses all new such videos from 2016 to 2022

4.2 billion: Views those 143,000 videos have generated

54%: Increase in deepfake pornographic videos were uploaded to website hosts in January through September 2023 compared with all of 2022



Advertisement

90-95%: Share of deepfake videos that are non-consensual porn involving women, according to Sensity AI, a company that has tracked online deepfake videos since December 2018

26,800: US victims of “sextortion” campaigns this year through September, according to the FBI. That’s a 149% rise compared to 2019.

Advertisement

A non-exhaustive list of US states where distributing AI-generated nudes is a crime (or soon could be)

California. Since 2019, the Golden State has allowed people to sue anyone who puts their image in a pornographic deepfake video. Under proposed legislation, the creation, intentional distribution, and exhibition of pornographic deepfakes would be criminalized.

Advertisement

Virginia. Under its “revenge porn” law—which bans spreading nude images or video “with the intent to coerce, harass, or intimidate” another person—Virginia covers deepfakes. Breaking the law could result in a 12-month prison sentence and up to $2,500 in fines.

Minnesota. A new law enacted in July makes it a crime to use deepfakes to influence an election or to disseminate sexual images without the subject’s consent. The punishment for creating deepfake porn is up to three years in prison and/or a $5,000 fine.

Advertisement

New York. A recent entrant, the state last month officially made it “illegal to disseminate AI-generated explicit images or ‘deepfakes’ of a person without their consent.” Violating the law could result in a year in jail and a $1,000 fine, and victims have the right to pursue legal action against perpetrators.. Last week, an undisclosed number of girls at a New Jersey high school learned that one or more students at their school had used an artificial intelligence tool to generate what appeared to be nude images of them. Worse, those images, which used at least a dozen photographs of girls on campus, were being shared among some boys at the school in group chats. There’s an ongoing investigation, the local police are involved, and counseling has been offered to affected students. If you think there ought to be a federal law against such harmful exploitation of underage victims, or even adults, for that matter, I agree with you. Sadly, there is no such crime that covers AI-generated nudes.

If you think there ought to be a federal law against such harmful exploitation of underage victims, or even adults, for that matter, I agree with you.

So-called deepfake photos and videos are proliferating almost as fast as people can download the software that generates them. In addition to creating fictionalized products that don’t resemble particular people, deepfakes can use the face, voice or partial image of a real person and meld it with other imagery to make it look or sound like a depiction of that person. Last spring, a deepfake photo of Pope Francis wearing a stylish Balenciaga brand puffy coat went viral. The pope might be fashionable, but that wasn’t him in the image.

In 2019, researchers concluded that 96% of the 14,000 online deepfake videos they found were pornographic. Genevieve Oh, an independent internet researcher who has tracked the rise of deepfakes, told The Washington Post that 143,00 videos on 40 popular websites for fakes had been seen 4.2 billion times.

From high school students to YouTube influencers and celebrities, the list of victims continues to grow, and the FBI warns that its “sextortion” caseload is expanding.

Across the internet, especially in the rank recesses of the dark web, pedophiles are having a field day with AI technology. Importantly, AI-generated child pornography includes some images borrowed from known, identifiable children, as well as wholly concocted fabrications based on thousands of digitized images strewn across the web. While the U.S. Justice Department claims this kind of content would be prosecutable under existing federal child pornography laws that cover drawings and cartoons depicting minors engaged in explicit sex, it can’t point to a single prosecution for AI child porn under this theory. Even if the Justice Department were to pursue someone for producing or possessing such material, it would have to prove that the images met the required definition of child porn as depicting minors engaged in explicit sex acts.

Federal child porn laws also wouldn’t help the high school students in New Jersey if they were portrayed as nude but not engaging in graphic conduct. Nor does that legal distinction offer much solace if the nonconsensual images of these victims live forever online to haunt them as they apply to colleges and jobs. We need a federal law to fill this widening gap between outdated legislation and high-tech reality.

That’s why the attorneys general of all 50 states are calling on Congress to do something. It’s also why President Joe Biden, in his Oct. 30 executive order addressing the need to understand and regulate AI, directed his administration to seek solutions for: preventing generative AI from producing child sexual abuse material or producing nonconsensual intimate imagery of real people (to include intimate digital depictions of the body or body parts of an identifiable person).

In June, Rep. Joe Morelle, D-N.Y., introduced the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images Act in an attempt to address the continued use of AI to produce nude depictions of real victims. The legislation is a step in the right direction toward reining in the use of AI to hurt people.

Nine states — including California, Texas and Virginia — have laws that offer some legal recourse for victims of AI-generated images. Some states allow civil lawsuits by victims, others have criminalized such conduct, and still others are considering mandating digital watermarks that would help trace images back to their producers. Some internet platforms facilitate “takedown” requests from victims and claim that they remove content when requested by a verified victim.

AI-generated porn doesn’t victimize its targets just once.

All of these options, including a requirement that manufacturers of AI image-making software automatically insert a “deepfake” label on fabricated content, must be explored now by Congress and federal agencies before additional victims are faced with the horror of having this technology used against them.

AI-generated porn doesn’t victimize its targets just once. These victims are violated every time someone clicks on the images. If nine states have figured this out, then our federal government should be able to, as well. This is a rare bipartisan issue that lawmakers should seize upon to do some good before bad actors use AI to wreak more havoc on more innocent people’s lives.. . . WESTFIELD, NJ — A group of Westfield High School students are the subject of an ongoing investigation after allegations surfaced of them using artificial intelligence to create and distribute pornographic images depicting peers. The principal of Westfield High School has notified parents about the inquiry and the consequent concerns among students.

The principal’s email highlighted the immediate steps taken to address the issue, including the deletion of the images in question and the provision of counseling services for affected students. The school’s Resource Officer and local police have been alerted and are involved in the investigation, which is set to conclude before the weekend.

““I am writing to make you aware of a situation that resulted in widespread misinformation and resulted in significant worry and concern amongst the student body of Westfield High School. Earlier today, students brought to our attention that some of our students had used Artificial Intelligence to create pornographic images from original photos. There was a great deal of concern about who had images created of them and if they were shared. At this time, we believe that any created images have been deleted and are not being circulated,” the letter read. “This is a very serious incident. We are continuing to investigate and will inform individuals and families of students involved once the investigation is complete. This will happen before the weekend. We made counseling available for all affected students and encouraged them to return to class when they felt able to do so. Additionally, our School Resource Officer and the Westfield PD have been made aware of our investigation. If a parent/guardian thinks their child is a victim of a criminal act in relation to this incident please report the matter to Westfield Police.”

Reports indicate that the images were produced by manipulating social media photos using AI technology to generate explicit content, commonly called deep fakes. This incident at Westfield High School adds to the growing discourse on the misuse of rapidly advancing AI technology and the potential harm it can inflict.



. (Daily Caller News Foundation) – Girls at Westfield High School in New Jersey were left shocked when they discovered boys were circulating fake nude photos of them, according to a Thursday report…

Share



(Daily Caller News Foundation) – Girls at Westfield High School in New Jersey were left shocked when they discovered boys were circulating fake nude photos of them, according to a Thursday report from The Wall Street Journal (WSJ).

The incident started Oct. 16 when sophomore boys at Westfield High were acting “weird,” one mom told WSJ, sharing what her daughter had passed along to her. On Oct. 20, one of the boys spilled: at least one student had used online tools powered by artificial intelligence (AI) to create fake nude photos of their female classmates using pictures of them that were already on the internet, according to WSJ.

Digitally altered or deepfake photos and videos have exploded in recent years. Briefly searching online will lead users to dozens of tools that offer face-swapping and “clothes-removing” capabilities. Pornographic material makes up the majority of deepfakes created on the internet, WSJ reported, citing image-detection firm Sensity AI.

[🧵 1/10] One of the world’s most popular social media platforms, TikTok, is now the home to a steady stream of deepfake videos.



We’ve seen everyone from Tom Cruise to Barack Obama be the star of these videos, but are they taking a sinister turn? pic.twitter.com/S92ZMkPsf4 — TNW (@thenextweb) July 21, 2022

Westfield High School confirmed the incident in an email to parents, according to WSJ. A spokesperson from the school declined to elaborate on exactly how many students were involved or if the school had taken disciplinary action. The school also declined to comment on whether Westfield staff members had seen the digitally created images.

One of the victims, identified as Francesca, discussed her reaction to the images during a Monday group meeting at her house. Westfield High parents, town council members and a member of the school board were among those in attendance. WSJ tuned in via the phone.

“At first I cried, and then I decided I should not be sad,” Francesca said. “I should be mad and should advocate for myself and the other victims.”

The victims are finding they may not have a clear legal avenue to press charges against the creators of the deepfake, the outlet reported. Nationally, there is no law against deepfake porn creation. A few states, including New York, Minnesota and California, have laws prohibiting the distribution of deepfake porn.

It’s possible the victims in this case could benefit from laws pertaining to child sexual-abuse material, the outlet reported, citing intellectual-property lawyer Natalie Elizaroff. However, the threshold to prove guilt is higher. The depicted individual must be determined to be a minor, the content must be explicit and someone needs to have created, possessed or distributed it.

The incident has made the girls rethink what they post online, and some decided to delete social media altogether, per WSJ.

“We’re aware that there are creepy guys out there,” one of the victims said, “but you’d never think one of your classmates would violate you like this.”. Teenage girls in the U.S. who are increasingly being targeted or threatened with fake nude photos created with artificial intelligence or other tools have limited ways to seek accountability or recourse, as schools and state legislatures struggle to catch up to the new technologies, according to legislators, legal experts and one victim who is now advocating for a federal bill.

Since the 2023 school year kicked into session, cases involving teen girls victimized by the fake nude photos, also known as deepfakes, have proliferated worldwide, including at high schools in New Jersey and Washington state.

Local police departments are investigating the incidents, lawmakers are racing to enact new measures that would enforce punishments against the photos’ creators, and affected families are pushing for answers and solutions.

Unrealistic deepfakes can be made with simple photo-editing tools that have existed for years. But two school districts told NBC News that they believe fake photos of teens that have affected their students were AI-generated.

AI technology is becoming more widely available, such as stable diffusion (open-source technology that can produce images from text prompts) and “face-swap” tools that can put a victim’s face in place of a pornographic performer’s face in a video or photo.

Apps that purport to “undress” clothed photos have also been identified as possible tools used in some cases and have been found available for free on app stores. These modern deepfakes can be more realistic-looking and harder to immediately identify as fake.

“I didn’t know how complex and scary AI technology is,” said Francesca Mani, 15, a sophomore at New Jersey’s Westfield High School, where more than 30 girls learned on Oct. 20 that they may have been depicted in explicit, AI-manipulated images.

“I was shocked because me and the other girls were betrayed by our classmates,” she said, “which means it could happen to anyone by anyone.”

Politicians and legal experts say there are few, if any, pathways to recourse for victims of AI-generated and deepfake pornography, which often attaches a victim’s face to a naked body.

The photos and videos can be surprisingly realistic, and according to Mary Anne Franks, a legal expert in nonconsensual sexually explicit media, the technology to make them has become more sophisticated and accessible.

A month after the incident at Westfield High School, Francesca and her mother, Dorota Mani, said they still do not know the identities or the number of people who created the images, how many were made, or if they still exist. It’s also unclear what punishment the school district doled out, if any.

The Town of Westfield directed comment to Westfield Public Schools, which declined to comment. Citing confidentiality, the school district previously told NBC New York that it “would not release any information about the students accused of creating the fake nude photos, or what discipline they are facing.”

Superintendent Raymond Gonzalez told the news outlet that the district would “continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond.”

In an email obtained by NBC News, Mary Asfendis, the high school’s principal, told parents on Oct. 20 that it was investigating claims by students that some of their peers had used AI to create pornographic images from original photos.

At the time, school officials believed any created images had been deleted and were not being circulated, according to the memo.

“This is a very serious incident,” Asfendis wrote, as she urged parents to discuss their use of technology with their children. “New technologies have made it possible to falsify images and students need to know the impact and damage those actions can cause to others.”

While Francesca has not seen the image of herself or others, her mother said she was told by Westfield’s principal that four people identified Francesca as a victim. Francesca has filed a police report, but neither the Westfield Police Department nor the prosecutor’s office responded to requests for comment.

New Jersey State Sen. Jon Bramnick said law enforcement expressed concerns to him that the incident would only rise to a “cyber-type harassment claim, even though it really should reach the level of a more serious crime.”

“If you attach a nude body to a child’s face, that to me is child pornography,” he said.

The Republican lawmaker said state laws currently fall short of punishing the content creators, even though the damage inflicted by real or manipulated images can be the same.

“It victimizes them the same way people who deal in child pornography do. It’s not only offensive to the young person, it defames the person. And you never know what’s going to happen to that photograph,” he said. “You don’t know where that is once it’s transmitted, when it’s going to come back and haunt the young girl.”

A pending state bill in New Jersey, Bramnick said, would ban deepfake pornography and impose criminal and civil penalties for nonconsensual disclosure. Under the bill, a person convicted of the crime would face three to five years in jail and/or a $15,000 fine, he said.

If passed, New Jersey would join at least 10 other states that have enacted legislation targeting deepfakes, according to Franks, a law professor and the president of the Cyber Civil Rights Initiative, a nonprofit group that combats nonconsensual porn.

The state laws targeting deepfakes vary widely in scope. Some of them, like ones in Texas and Wyoming, make nonconsensual pornographic deepfakes a criminal violation. Other states, like New York, have laws that only allow victims to bring forward a civil suit.

Franks said the laws are “all over the place,” noncomprehensive, and the constitutionality of the laws has been called into question.

“So you’ve got a patchwork of criminal charges, which are going to be difficult in these cases because the perpetrators are going to be minors, so that raises its own questions,” she said.

‘Probably just the tip of the iceberg’

It’s unclear how many young people have been victimized by AI-generated nudes.

The FBI said it is difficult to calculate the number of minors who are sexually exploited. But the agency said it has seen a rise in the number of open cases involving crimes against children. There were more than 4,800 cases in 2022, which grew from more than 4,100 the year before, the FBI told NBC News.

“The FBI takes crimes against children seriously and works to investigate the facts of each allegation in a collective effort with our state, local, and tribal law enforcement partners,” the agency said, adding that victims can face significant challenges when trying to stop the spread of the image or get it removed from the internet.

Franks said there are likely a lot more incidents and that they will only increase.

“Whatever we’re hearing about that floats up to the surface is probably just the tip of the iceberg,” she said. “This is probably happening quite a bit right now, and girls just haven’t found out about it yet or discovered it or the school is covering it up.”

At Issaquah High School in Washington state, a school district representative said a mid-October incident “involving fake, AI-generated imagery of students” continues to affect the student body.

In the Spanish town of Almendralejo, mothers say dozens of their middle school-aged daughters have been victimized with AI-generated nude photos created with an app that can “undress” clothed photos. Local police in New Jersey, Washington and Spain are investigating the high school cases.

In a June public service announcement, the FBI warned that technology used to create nonconsensual pornographic deepfake photos and videos was improving and being used for harassment and sextortion.

Meanwhile, the National Association of Attorneys General called on Congress in September to study AI’s effects on children and come up with legislation that would protect them from those abuses.

In a letter signed by 54 state and territory attorneys general, the group said it was concerned that “AI is creating a new frontier for abuse that makes prosecution more difficult.”

"We are engaged in a race against time to protect the children of our country from the dangers of AI,” the letter said.

Francesca and her mother said they plan to head to Washington, D.C., in December to personally urge Congress members to act, as they continue to advocate for updated policies within the school system and seek accountability for what happened.

“We all know this is not an isolated incident,” Dorota Mani said. “It will never be an isolated incident. This is going to keep happening all the time. We have to stop pretending that it’s not important.”

The rise in incidents targeting high school girls follows the proliferation of AI deepfake apps and deepfake porn websites where such material is created, shared and sold.

A 2019 report from Sensity, an Amsterdam-based company that tracks AI-generated media, found that 96% of deepfakes created at that point were sexually explicit and featured women who didn’t consent to their creation. Many victims are unaware the deepfakes exist.

Franks said there is nothing parents and children can do to prevent the creation of deepfakes using their likenesses. Instead, Franks said schools and local law enforcement need to make an example out of perpetrators in cases that reach the general public, to discourage others from creating deepfakes.

“If you could imagine a dramatic and important response from the school in New Jersey or from the authorities in New Jersey to make an example out of the case, really strict penalties, people go to jail, you might get the discouragement,” Franks said.

“In the absence of that, it’s just going to become one more tool that men and boys use against women and girls to exploit and humiliate them and that the law basically has nothing to say about.”. NJ HS students accused of making AI-generated pornographic images NJ HS students accused of making AI-generated pornographic images 02:45

A mother and her 14-year-old daughter are advocating for better protections for victims after AI-generated nude images of the teen and other female classmates were circulated at a high school in New Jersey.

Meanwhile, on the other side of the country, officials are investigating an incident involving a teenage boy who allegedly used artificial intelligence to create and distribute similar images of other students – also teen girls - that attend a high school in suburban Seattle, Washington.

The disturbing cases have put a spotlight yet again on explicit AI-generated material that overwhelmingly harms women and children and is booming online at an unprecedented rate. According to an analysis by independent researcher Genevieve Oh that was shared with The Associated Press, more than 143,000 new deepfake videos were posted online this year, which surpasses every other year combined.

Desperate for solutions, affected families are pushing lawmakers to implement robust safeguards for victims whose images are manipulated using new AI models, or the plethora of apps and websites that openly advertise their services. Advocates and some legal experts are also calling for federal regulation that can provide uniform protections across the country and send a strong message to current and would-be perpetrators.

"We're fighting for our children," said Dorota Mani, whose daughter was one of the victims in Westfield, a New Jersey suburb outside of New York City. "They are not Republicans, and they are not Democrats. They don't care. They just want to be loved, and they want to be safe."

"AI pandemic"

The problem with deepfakes isn't new, but experts say it's getting worse as the technology to produce it becomes more available and easier to use. Researchers have been sounding the alarm this year on the explosion of AI-generated child sexual abuse material using depictions of real victims or virtual characters. In June, the FBI warned it was continuing to receive reports from victims, both minors and adults, whose photos or videos were used to create explicit content that was shared online.

"AI problem. I would call it 'AI pandemic' at this point," Mani told CBS New York last month.

Dorota Mani sits for an interview in her office in Jersey City, N.J. on Wednesday, Nov. 8, 2023. Mani is the parent of a 14-year-old New Jersey student victimized by an AI-generated deepfake image. Peter K. Afriyie / AP

Several states have passed their own laws over the years to try to combat the problem, but they vary in scope. Texas, Minnesota and New York passed legislation this year criminalizing nonconsensual deepfake porn, joining Virginia, Georgia and Hawaii who already had laws on the books. Some states, like California and Illinois, have only given victims the ability to sue perpetrators for damages in civil court, which New York and Minnesota also allow.

A few other states are considering their own legislation, including New Jersey, where a bill is currently in the works to ban deepfake porn and impose penalties - either jail time, a fine or both - on those who spread it.

State Sen. Kristin Corrado, a Republican who introduced the legislation earlier this year, said she decided to get involved after reading an article about people trying to evade revenge porn laws by using their former partner's image to generate deepfake porn.

"We just had a feeling that an incident was going to happen," Corrado said.

The bill has languished for a few months, but there's a good chance it might pass, she said, especially with the spotlight that's been put on the issue because of Westfield.

The Westfield event took place this summer and was brought to the attention of the high school on Oct. 20, Westfield High School spokesperson Mary Ann McGann said in a statement. McGann did not provide details on how the AI-generated images were spread, but Mani, the mother of one of the girls, said she received a call from the school informing her nude pictures were created using the faces of some female students and then circulated among a group of friends on the social media app Snapchat.

Parents also got an email from the principal, warning of the dangers of artificial intelligence and saying the complaints from students had sparked an investigation, CBS New York reported.

The school hasn't confirmed any disciplinary actions, citing confidentiality on matters involving students. Westfield police and the Union County Prosecutor's office, who were both notified, did not reply to requests for comment.

"Intimate imagery of real individuals"

Details haven't emerged about the incident in Washington state, which happened in October and is under investigation by police. Paula Schwan, the chief of the Issaquah Police Department, said they have obtained multiple search warrants and noted the information they have might be "subject to change" as the probe continues. When reached for comment, the Issaquah School District said it could not discuss the specifics because of the investigation, but said any form of bullying, harassment, or mistreatment among students is "entirely unacceptable."

If officials move to prosecute the incident in New Jersey, current state law prohibiting the sexual exploitation of minors might already apply, said Mary Anne Franks, a law professor at George Washington University who leads Cyber Civil Rights Initiative, an organization aiming to combat online abuses. But those protections don't extend to adults who might find themselves in a similar scenario, she said.

The best fix, Franks said, would come from a federal law that can provide consistent protections nationwide and penalize dubious organizations profiting from products and apps that easily allow anyone to make deepfakes. She said that might also send a strong signal to minors who might create images of other kids impulsively.

President Joe Biden signed an executive order in October that, among other things, called for barring the use of generative AI to produce child sexual abuse material or non-consensual "intimate imagery of real individuals." The order also directs the federal government to issue guidance to label and watermark AI-generated content to help differentiate between authentic and material made by software.

Citing the Westfield incident, U.S. Rep. Tom Kean, Jr., a Republican who represents the town, introduced a bill on Monday that would require developers to put disclosures on AI-generated content. Among other efforts, another federal bill introduced by U.S. Rep. Joe Morelle, a New York Democrat, would make it illegal to share deepfake porn images online. But it hasn't advanced for months due to congressional gridlock.

Some argue for caution - including the American Civil Liberties Union, the Electronic Frontier Foundation and The Media Coalition, an organization that works for trade groups representing publishers, movie studios and others - saying that careful consideration is needed to avoid proposals that may run afoul of the First Amendment.

"Some concerns about abusive deepfakes can be addressed under existing cyber harassment" laws, said Joe Johnson, an attorney for ACLU of New Jersey. "Whether federal or state, there must be substantial conversation and stakeholder input to ensure any bill is not overbroad and addresses the stated problem."

Mani said her daughter has created a website and set up a charity aiming to help AI victims. The two have also been in talks with state lawmakers pushing the New Jersey bill and are planning a trip to Washington to advocate for more protections.

"Not every child, boy or girl, will have the support system to deal with this issue," Mani said. "And they might not see the light at the end of the tunnel."

School Superintendent Dr. Raymond González released the following statement to CBS New York:

"All school districts are grappling with the challenges and impact of artificial intelligence and other technology available to students at any time and anywhere. The Westfield Public School District has safeguards in place to prevent this from happening on our network and school-issued devices. We continue to strengthen our efforts by educating our students and establishing clear guidelines to ensure that these new technologies are used responsibly in our schools and beyond."

The district also says they can't comment on how many students are affected or any disciplinary actions.. . A mother and her 14-year-old daughter are advocating for better protections for victims after AI-generated nude images of the teen and other female classmates were circulated at a high school in New Jersey.

Meanwhile, on the other side of the country, officials are investigating an incident involving a teenage boy who allegedly used artificial intelligence to create and distribute similar images of other students – also teen girls - that attend a high school in suburban Seattle, Washington.

The disturbing cases have put a spotlight yet again on explicit AI-generated material that overwhelmingly harms women and children and is booming online at an unprecedented rate. According to an analysis by independent researcher Genevieve Oh that was shared with The Associated Press, more than 143,000 new deepfake videos were posted online this year, which surpasses every other year combined.

Desperate for solutions, affected families are pushing lawmakers to implement robust safeguards for victims whose images are manipulated using new AI models, or the plethora of apps and websites that openly advertise their services. Advocates and some legal experts are also calling for federal regulation that can provide uniform protections across the country and send a strong message to current and would-be perpetrators.

“We’re fighting for our children,” said Dorota Mani, whose daughter was one of the victims in Westfield, a New Jersey suburb outside of New York City. “They are not Republicans, and they are not Democrats. They don’t care. They just want to be loved, and they want to be safe.”

The problem with deepfakes isn’t new, but experts say it’s getting worse as the technology to produce it becomes more available and easier to use. Researchers have been sounding the alarm this year on the explosion of AI-generated child sexual abuse material using depictions of real victims or virtual characters. In June, the FBI warned it was continuing to receive reports from victims, both minors and adults, whose photos or videos were used to create explicit content that was shared online.

Dorota Mani sits for an interview in her office in Jersey City, N.J. on Wednesday, Nov. 8, 2023. Mani is the parent of a 14-year-old New Jersey high school student victimized by an AI-generated deepfake image. (AP Photo/Peter K. Afriyie)

Several states have passed their own laws over the years to try to combat the problem, but they vary in scope. Texas, Minnesota and New York passed legislation this year criminalizing nonconsensual deepfake porn, joining Virginia, Georgia and Hawaii who already had laws on the books. Some states, like California and Illinois, have only given victims the ability to sue perpetrators for damages in civil court, which New York and Minnesota also allow.

A few other states are considering their own legislation, including New Jersey, where a bill is currently in the works to ban deepfake porn and impose penalties — either jail time, a fine or both — on those who spread it.

State Sen. Kristin Corrado, a Republican who introduced the legislation earlier this year, said she decided to get involved after reading an article about people trying to evade revenge porn laws by using their former partner’s image to generate deepfake porn.

“We just had a feeling that an incident was going to happen,” Corrado said.

The bill has languished for a few months, but there’s a good chance it might pass, she said, especially with the spotlight that’s been put on the issue because of Westfield.

The Westfield event took place this summer and was brought to the attention of the high school on Oct. 20, Westfield High School spokesperson Mary Ann McGann said in a statement. McGann did not provide details on how the AI-generated images were spread, but Mani, the mother of one of the girls, said she received a call from the school informing her nude pictures were created using the faces of some female students and then circulated among a group of friends on the social media app Snapchat.

The school hasn’t confirmed any disciplinary actions, citing confidentiality on matters involving students. Westfield police and the Union County Prosecutor’s office, who were both notified, did not reply to requests for comment.

Westfield High School in Westfield, N.J. is shown on Wednesday, Nov. 8, 2023. AI-generated nude pictures were created using the faces of some female students at the school and then circulated among a group of friends on the social media app Snapchat. (AP Photo/Peter K. Afriyie)

Details haven’t emerged about the incident in Washington state, which happened in October and is under investigation by police. Paula Schwan, the chief of the Issaquah Police Department, said they have obtained multiple search warrants and noted the information they have might be “subject to change” as the probe continues. When reached for comment, the Issaquah School District said it could not discuss the specifics because of the investigation, but said any form of bullying, harassment, or mistreatment among students is “entirely unacceptable.”

If officials move to prosecute the incident in New Jersey, current state law prohibiting the sexual exploitation of minors might already apply, said Mary Anne Franks, a law professor at George Washington University who leads Cyber Civil Rights Initiative, an organization aiming to combat online abuses. But those protections don’t extend to adults who might find themselves in a similar scenario, she said.

The best fix, Franks said, would come from a federal law that can provide consistent protections nationwide and penalize dubious organizations profiting from products and apps that easily allow anyone to make deepfakes. She said that might also send a strong signal to minors who might create images of other kids impulsively.

President Joe Biden signed an executive order in October that, among other things, called for barring the use of generative AI to produce child sexual abuse material or non-consensual “intimate imagery of real individuals.” The order also directs the federal government to issue guidance to label and watermark AI-generated content to help differentiate between authentic and material made by software.

Citing the Westfield incident, U.S. Rep. Tom Kean, Jr., a Republican who represents the town, introduced a bill on Monday that would require developers to put disclosures on AI-generated content. Among other efforts, another federal bill introduced by U.S. Rep. Joe Morelle, a New York Democrat, would make it illegal to share deepfake porn images online. But it hasn’t advanced for months due to congressional gridlock.

Some argue for caution — including the American Civil Liberties Union, the Electronic Frontier Foundation and The Media Coalition, an organization that works for trade groups representing publishers, movie studios and others — saying that careful consideration is needed to avoid proposals that may run afoul of the First Amendment.

Dorota Mani sits for an interview in her office in Jersey City, N.J. on Wednesday, Nov. 8, 2023. Mani is the parent of a 14-year-old Westfield High School student victimized by an AI-generated deepfake image. (AP Photo/Peter K. Afriyie)

“Some concerns about abusive deepfakes can be addressed under existing cyber harassment” laws, said Joe Johnson, an attorney for ACLU of New Jersey. “Whether federal or state, there must be substantial conversation and stakeholder input to ensure any bill is not overbroad and addresses the stated problem.”

Mani said her daughter has created a website and set up a charity aiming to help AI victims. The two have also been in talks with state lawmakers pushing the New Jersey bill and are planning a trip to Washington to advocate for more protections.

“Not every child, boy or girl, will have the support system to deal with this issue,” Mani said. “And they might not see the light at the end of the tunnel.”

__

AP reporters Geoff Mulvihill and Matt O’Brien contributed from Cherry Hill, New Jersey and Providence, Rhode Island.. A teenage victim of nonconsensual sexually explicit deepfakes joined Rep. Joe Morelle, D-N.Y., on Tuesday to advocate for a bipartisan bill that would criminalize sharing such material at the federal level.

In May, Morelle introduced the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images Act. The bill was referred to the House Judiciary Committee, but no further action has been taken. In addition to criminalizing the nonconsensual sharing of sexually explicit deepfakes, the measure would also create a right of private action for victims to be able to sue creators and distributors of the material while remaining anonymous.

The production and sharing of nonconsensual sexually explicit deepfakes, which typically use AI to graft victims’ faces into pornographic images or videos, has exploded alongside the accessibility of tools to create such material and websites dedicated to sharing and monetizing it. Currently, U.S. victims are limited by a patchwork of state laws that govern deepfakes, and there is no federal law regarding them.

Since the Preventing Deepfakes of Intimate Images Act was introduced last year, dozens of new deepfake victims have spoken out, including New Jersey high schooler Francesca Mani, who spoke at Tuesday’s news conference. Mani said her school administration told her on Oct. 20 that male classmates had created and shared sexually explicit deepfakes of her and more than 30 other girls. She has never seen the images and said she was told they were destroyed.

“This issue is pretty black and white,” Mani said. “No kid, teen or woman should ever have to experience what I went through. I felt sad and helpless.”

“I’m here, standing up and shouting for change, fighting for laws so no one else has to feel as lost and powerless as I did on Oct. 20th,” she said. “The glaring lack of laws speaks volumes.”

Morelle emphasized the scale of the issue.

“Deepfakes are happening every single day to women everywhere,” Morelle said. “This isn’t just celebrities. This is everyday people all over the United States.”

After he heard about what happened at Mani’s high school, which is in his hometown, Rep. Tom Kean, R.-N.J., became the first Republican co-sponsor of Morelle’s bill. He also introduced another bill, the AI Labeling Act of 2023, in November. The measure would require generative AI tools to put clear and conspicuous disclosures on AI-generated content, including text from AI chatbots.

The lack of legislative movement around deepfakes has raised concerns about the technology’s potential to disrupt the 2024 election cycle. A legal expert who specializes in nonconsensual intimate imagery, Mary Anne Franks, who Morelle said helped inform the bill, said deepfakes have already targeted female politicians.

“For women and girls, the AI threat is not around the corner. It is here,” Franks said at the news conference.