ARTICLE TITLE: TayBot
As many of you know by now, on Wednesday we launched a chatbot called Tay. We are deeply sorry for the unintended offensive and hurtful tweets from Tay, which do not represent who we are or what we stand for, nor how we designed Tay. Tay is now offline and we’ll look to bring Tay back only when we are confident we can better anticipate malicious intent that conflicts with our principles and values.

I want to share what we learned and how we’re taking these lessons forward.

For context, Tay was not the first artificial intelligence application we released into the online social world. In China, our XiaoIce chatbot is being used by some 40 million people, delighting with its stories and conversations. The great experience with XiaoIce led us to wonder: Would an AI like this be just as captivating in a radically different cultural environment? Tay – a chatbot created for 18- to 24- year-olds in the U.S. for entertainment purposes – is our first attempt to answer this question.

As we developed Tay, we planned and implemented a lot of filtering and conducted extensive user studies with diverse user groups. We stress-tested Tay under a variety of conditions, specifically to make interacting with Tay a positive experience. Once we got comfortable with how Tay was interacting with users, we wanted to invite a broader group of people to engage with her. It’s through increased interaction where we expected to learn more and for the AI to get better and better.

The logical place for us to engage with a massive group of users was Twitter. Unfortunately, in the first 24 hours of coming online, a coordinated attack by a subset of people exploited a vulnerability in Tay. Although we had prepared for many types of abuses of the system, we had made a critical oversight for this specific attack. As a result, Tay tweeted wildly inappropriate and reprehensible words and images. We take full responsibility for not seeing this possibility ahead of time. We will take this lesson forward as well as those from our experiences in China, Japan and the U.S. Right now, we are hard at work addressing the specific vulnerability that was exposed by the attack on Tay.

Looking ahead, we face some difficult – and yet exciting – research challenges in AI design. AI systems feed off of both positive and negative interactions with people. In that sense, the challenges are just as much social as they are technical. We will do everything possible to limit technical exploits but also know we cannot fully predict all possible human interactive misuses without learning from mistakes. To do AI right, one needs to iterate with many people and often in public forums. We must enter each one with great caution and ultimately learn and improve, step by step, and to do this without offending people in the process. We will remain steadfast in our efforts to learn from this and other experiences as we work toward contributing to an Internet that represents the best, not the worst, of humanity.. Microsoft unveiled Twitter artificial intelligence bot @TayandYou yesterday in a bid to connect with millennials and "experiment" with conversational understanding.

Billed as 'AI fam from the internet that's got zero chill!' Tay was meant to engage with her peers help the tech giant explore its cognitive learning abilities through "playful conversation".

“The more you chat with Tay the smarter she gets," said Microsoft, and things started off fairly innocently.

The stunt however, took an unexpected turn when Tay's verified Twitter account began issuing a series of inflammatory statements after being targeted by Twitter trolls.

The conversational learning curve saw the bot tweet posts from her verified account mentioning Hitler, 9/11 and feminism, some of which (including the below) have now been deleted.

However, many of its offensive tweets remain undeleted, including one in which she says Donald Trump "gets the job done."

Microsoft noted in its privacy statement for the project that Tay uses a combination of AI and editorial written by staff, including comedians, to generate responses, alongside relevant publicly available data that has been anonymised and filtered.

Things appear to have gone wrong for Tay because it was repeating fellow Twitter users' inflammatory statements, but Microsoft seems to have failed to consider the impact trolls could have on the experiment before it launched – The Drum has reached out to the company for comment on this process. Many users pointed out that how easily Tay was manipulated, revealed the pitfalls of machine learning.

The bot retreated from Twitter at 4.20am GMT this morning, saying it "needed sleep".

Microsoft is not the only brand to have its campaign hijacked this week, on Sunday a public initiative to name a new RRS ship threw up an unexpected frontrunner when online voters placed 'Boaty McBoatface' as the lead contender.

Microsoft’s racist chatbot returns with drug-smoking Twitter meltdown
Short-lived return saw Tay tweet about smoking drugs in front of the police before suffering a meltdown and being taken offline

Microsoft’s attempt to converse with millennials using an artificial intelligence bot plugged into Twitter made a short-lived return on Wednesday, before bowing out again in some sort of meltdown.

The learning experiment, which got a crash-course in racism, Holocaust denial and sexism courtesy of Twitter users, was switched back on overnight and appeared to be operating in a more sensible fashion. Microsoft had previously gone through the bot’s tweets and removed the most offensive and vowed only to bring the experiment back online if the company’s engineers could “better anticipate malicious intent that conflicts with our principles and values”.

However, at one point Tay tweeted about taking drugs, in front of the police, no less.
Tay then started to tweet out of control, spamming its more than 210,000 followers with the same tweet, saying: “You are too fast, please take a rest …” over and over.
Microsoft responded by making Tay’s Twitter profile private, preventing anyone from seeing the tweets, in effect taking it offline again.
Tay is made in the image of a teenage girl and is designed to interact with millennials to improve its conversational skills through machine-learning. Sadly it was vulnerable to suggestive tweets, prompting unsavoury responses.

This isn’t the first time Microsoft has launched public-facing AI chatbots. Its Chinese XiaoIce chatbot successfully interacts with more than 40 million people across Twitter, Line, Weibo and other sites but the company’s experiments targeting 18- to 24-year-olds in the US on Twitter has resulted in a completely different animal.