(WARNING: This article contains details of abuse. Child sexual abuse imagery is illegal. If you see sexually explicit images or videos of minors on the web, please report it)

As AI takes over the world, its repercussions have already begun to come to light. In creating at least seven child pornographic AI-generated deepfake movies, where the face of one person is superimposed on the body of another, Steven Larouche, 61 has pled guilty. Larouche, who is from Sherbrooke, Quebec, also admitted to having thousands of computer files containing child pornography; for this offence, he received an additional four and a half years in prison. Any visual depiction of a person under the age of 18 engaging in explicit sexual conduct is prohibited by Canadian law. Deepfake Porn Could Be a Growing Problem Amid AI Race.

According to The Canadian Press, provincial court judge Benoit Gagnon stated in his decision that he thought this case was the first of its sort in Canada. Gagnon expressed his worry that future offenders will use the same AI technology to overlay recordings of other children being sexually assaulted with the faces of youngsters whose photographs they locate on social media. Although Larouche's attorneys argued that a lighter sentence was appropriate because no children were harmed in the production of the videos, the judge ruled that the children whose bodies were used in the videos had once again had their sexual integrity violated.

“The use of deepfake technology in criminal hands is chilling. The type of software allows crimes to be committed that could involve virtually every child in our communities,” Gagnon writes in his ruling that took place on April 14. “A simple video excerpt of a child available on social media, or a video of children taken in a public place, could turn them into potential victims of child pornography,” her further said.

According to the judge's order, many photographs used in child pornography have a digital fingerprint that enables law enforcement to recognise them. Larouche made it more difficult for law enforcement to halt the dissemination of illegal material by producing the phoney photographs.

There is presently no federal law in the United States that prevents the use of people's photographs in deepfake porn or any related technology without their permission. According to the judge, many photos of child sexual exploitation have a digital fingerprint that enables investigators to recognise them. Larouche made it more challenging for law enforcement to halt the dissemination of the illegal material by producing the synthetic photographs.

Larouche also acknowledged having more than 545,000 computer files, some of which he shared with others, that contained pictures or films of child sex assault.

These pictures included a series of one girl being mistreated between the ages of seven and fourteen over the course of seven years. Police also discovered images of the youngster from her social media accounts as well as personal data about her, including her real name, the location of her home, and the name of her school.

(The above story first appeared on LatestLY on May 04, 2023 11:28 PM IST. For more news and updates on politics, world, sports, entertainment and lifestyle, log on to our website latestly.com).. A man in Quebec, Canada has been sentenced to three years in prison for using artificial intelligence (AI) to generate images of child pornography — the first ruling of its kind in the country.

Steven Larouche, 61, pleaded guilty to creating at least seven AI-generated deepfake videos of child porn, which superimpose the face of an individual onto the body of another person.

Larouche, from Sherbrooke, Quebec, also pleaded guilty to possessing hundreds of thousands of computer files of child pornography, for which he was sentenced to an additional four and a half years.

Canadian law bans any visual representation of someone depicted as being under the age of 18 engaged in explicit sexual activity.

The Canadian Press reports that in his ruling, provincial court judge Benoit Gagnon said he believed that this case was the first of its kind in Canada.

Gagnon voiced his concern that future criminals will use the same AI technology to put the faces of children whose images they find on social media onto videos of other children being sexually assaulted.

“The use of deepfake technology in criminal hands is chilling. The type of software allows crimes to be committed that could involve virtually every child in our communities,” Gagnon writes in his ruling that took place on April 14.

“A simple video excerpt of a child available on social media, or a video of children taken in a public place, could turn them into potential victims of child pornography.”

While Larouche’s lawyers argued for a lighter sentence, as children were not assaulted when he produced the videos, the judge wrote that the children whose bodies appeared in the videos had their sexual integrity violated again.

Many images of child pornography have a digital fingerprint, allowing police to identify them, the judge writes in his ruling. By creating the synthetic images, Larouche made it more difficult for police to stop the spread of illicit material.

In February, PetaPixel reported on a computer programmer who was arrested in Spain for creating child porn images with AI software. The arrest was allegedly the first of its kind in the country.

In the U.S., there is currently no federal legislation to protect against people’s images being used without their consent in deepfake porn or with any associated technology.

Image credits: Header photo licensed via Depositphotos.. A 61-year-old Quebec man has been sentenced to eight years in prison for producing AI-generated images of child pornography.

Steven Larouche, the man in question, pleaded guilty to the creation of several deepfake videos as well as possessing over 545,000 files of child pornography—a portion of which he sent to other people—according to the Canadian Press.

Provincial court judge Benoit explained that this was the first case in Canada of this kind and that he’s concerned that future criminals will use this same technology to put children’s faces from pictures uploaded to various social media platforms onto videos of other children who were sexually assaulted.

“The use of deepfake technology in criminal hands is chilling,” Gagnon wrote in his decision. “The type of software allows crimes to be committed that could involve virtually every child in our communities. A simple video excerpt of a child available on social media, or a video of children taken in a public place, could turn them into potential victims of child pornography.”

Larouche’s lawyers fought for his sentence to be lighter, though the judge explained that the children who appeared in the illicit materials had their sexual integrity violated another time.

Larouche has already served approximately two years of his sentence and will remain in prison for the next five years and 11 months.. WARNING: This article contains details of abuse.

A Quebec man has been sentenced to more than three years in prison for using artificial intelligence to produce synthetic videos of child pornography.

Steven Larouche, 61, of Sherbrooke, Que., pleaded guilty to creating at least seven videos with so-called deepfake technology, which is used to superimpose the face of an individual onto the body of another person.

He also pleaded guilty to possessing hundreds of thousands of computer files of child pornography, for which he was sentenced an additional four and a half years.

Provincial court judge Benoit Gagnon wrote in his ruling, issued earlier this month, that he believes this was the first case in the country involving deepfakes of child sexual exploitation.

He said he worries what will happen as criminals use the technology to put the faces of children whose images they find on social media onto videos of other children being sexually assaulted.

LISTEN | The deepfake porn scandal that rocked the world of livestream platform Twitch: 15:48 AI technology, gaming streamers, and deepfake porn create a perfect storm on Twitch Tech journalists Alyssa Bereznak and Samantha Cole weigh in on the deepfake porn scandal with gaming streamer Atrioc that rocked the world of Twitch last week, and its impact on female streamers like QTCinderella.

"The use of deepfake technology in criminal hands is chilling. The type of software allows crimes to be committed that could involve virtually every child in our communities," Gagnon wrote in the April 14 decision.

"A simple video excerpt of a child available on social media, or a video of children taken in a public place, could turn them into potential victims of child pornography."

Gagnon wrote that the creation of the new images of sexual abuse encourages the market for child pornography, which craves novelty, and puts children at risk by "fuelling fantasies that incite sexual offences against children."

While Larouche's lawyers argued for a lighter sentence, because children were not assaulted when he produced the videos, the judge wrote that the children whose bodies appeared in the videos had their sexual integrity violated again.

Complicating police investigations

Many images of child sexual exploitation have a digital fingerprint, allowing police to identify them, the judge wrote. By creating the synthetic images, Larouche made it more difficult for police to stop the spread of the illicit material.

Larouche also admitted to possessing more than 545,000 computer files containing images or videos of child sexual abuse, some of which he made available to others.

Among those images was a series of one girl being abused over a seven-year period, between the ages of seven and 14. On Larouche's computer, police also found photos of her from her social media accounts and personal information about the child, including her real name, the town where she lives and the name of her school.

In total, Gagnon sentenced Larouche to eight years in prison. With credit for time served, Larouche will be required to serve another five years and 11 months.

Canadian law bans any visual representation of someone depicted as being under the age of 18 engaged in explicit sexual activity.

'You can grab an image online and create this type of imagery,' said Stephen Sauer, director of Cybertip.ca (RedPixel/stock.adobe.com)

Creating a Canadian precedent

Stephen Sauer, the director of Cybertip.ca, said that while there have been earlier cases of people creating synthetic images of child sexual abuse in more rudimentary ways, such as with Photoshop, this may be the first time someone in Canada has been sentenced for creating material using deepfake technology.

"We're almost in this unprecedented time where any child can be harmed as a result of this type of material. So you can grab any image online and create this type of imagery and harm them in any number of ways," he said in an interview Wednesday.

The synthetic images not only humiliate the victims, violating their dignity and privacy, but people could also seek those children out to sexually assault them, Sauer said.

"It creates a safety risk for that child, because there are individuals out there who will seek to identify individuals in sexual abuse imagery."

Vasileia Karasavva, a masters student in clinical psychology at the University of British Columbia who co-wrote a 2021 paper on the threat of deepfake pornography, said the technological bar for creating videos this way keeps getting lower.

The technology is getting easier to use and the number of images required to put someone's face into a video is also declining, she said in an interview Wednesday, adding that apps can be used to scrape images of an individual from their social media accounts.

She said deepfake pornography has two victims: the person whose body appears in the video, as well as the person whose face appears.

While there's little research on the specific impact of deepfake pornography on victims, research on other forms of online sexual violence shows it often affects victims in similar ways to in-person sexual assaults.

"This victimization continues, as well," Karasavva said. "It's very public. Very often, it's very permanent, and the victim feels very helpless and powerless in that situation."