CHARLOTTE, N.C. – David Tatum, 41, a child psychiatrist in Charlotte, was sentenced today to 40 years in prison followed by 30 years of supervised release for sexual exploitation of a minor and using artificial intelligence (AI) to create child pornography images of minors, announced Dena J. King, U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina. Tatum was also ordered to pay restitution in an amount to be determined within 90 days, a $100 special assessment per count of conviction, and a special assessment totaling $99,000 under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act (AVAA). After he is released from prison, Tatum will also be required to register with the Sex Offender Registry Board in any state or jurisdiction where he works or resides.

Robert M. DeWitt, Special Agent in Charge of Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in North Carolina joins U.S. Attorney King in making today’s announcement.

“As a child psychiatrist, Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children. Regardless, he engaged in the depraved practice of using secret recordings of his victims to create illicit images and videos of them,” said U.S. Attorney King. “Tatum also misused artificial intelligence in the worst possible way: to victimize children. Today’s 40-year sentence underscores our efforts to do all we can to bring justice to child victims. As the field of artificial intelligence advances, my office is committed to prosecuting predators who seek to exploit this technology to inflict harm on children.”

“It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification. And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable,” said FBI Charlotte Special Agent in Charge DeWitt. “The FBI will never stop working to put predators like Tatum behind bars for a very long time.”

According to filed court documents, evidence presented at Tatum's trial and witness testimony, between 2016 to 2021, Tatum possessed images and videos of child pornography. As trial evidence established, in or about July 2016, Tatum secretly recorded a minor while the minor was undressing and showering. A forensic analysis of electronic devices revealed that Tatum produced the video of the minor and possessed it, along with other images and videos of child pornography. According to trial evidence, Tatum made similar surreptitious recordings of others, including of his patient during an outpatient visit who had just turned 18 years old five days before the recording.

Additionally, trial evidence also established that Tatum used AI to digitally alter clothed images of minors making them sexually explicit. Specifically, trial evidence showed that Tatum used a web-based artificial intelligence application to alter images of clothed minors into child pornography. Two of the images Tatum used AI to modify were from a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school.

On May 4, a federal jury in Charlotte convicted Tatum of one count of production of child pornography, one count of transportation of child pornography, and one count of possession of child pornography. Tatum is currently in federal custody and will be transferred to the custody of the federal Bureau of Prisons upon designation of a federal facility.

In making today’s announcement, U.S. Attorney King commended FBI for their investigation of the case.

Assistant United States Attorneys Daniel Cervantes and Mark T. Odulio of the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Charlotte prosecuted the case.

This case was brought as part of Project Safe Childhood, a nationwide initiative to combat the growing epidemic of child sexual exploitation and abuse, launched in May 2006 by the Department of Justice. Led by U.S. Attorneys’ Offices and the Criminal Division’s Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section (CEOS), Project Safe Childhood marshals federal, state and local resources to better locate, apprehend and prosecute individuals who exploit children via the Internet, as well as to identify and rescue victims. For more information about Project Safe Childhood, please visit www.projectsafechildhood.gov.. . CHARLOTTE, N.C. (WBTV) - A child psychiatrist in Charlotte was sentenced to 40 years in prison on Wednesday after he was previously convicted of producing and possessing child sexual abuse material (CSAM).

According to the U.S. Attorney’s Office of the Western District of NC, David Tatum sexually exploited a minor and used artificial intelligence to create CSAM.

In addition to the prison sentence, Tatum was also ordered to pay restitution, a $100 special assessment per count of conviction, and a special assessment totaling $99,000 under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act (AVAA).

Following his time in prison, he must register with the sex offender registry board. He will also be under 30 years of supervised release.

According to court documents, trial evidence revealed that in or about July 2016, Tatum secretly recorded a minor while the minor was undressing and showering. A forensic analysis of electronic devices revealed that Tatum produced the video of the minor and possessed it, along with other images and videos of CSAM.

“It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification,” FBI Charlotte Special Agent in Charge DeWitt said. “When the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable.”

Further evidence indicated that Tatum made similar surreptitious recordings of others, including of a patient during an outpatient visit. That patient had just turned 18 years old five days before the recording.

Additionally, trial evidence also established that Tatum used AI to digitally alter clothed images of minors to make them sexually explicit. Two of the images Tatum modified were from a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school.

In May, a federal jury convicted him of one count of production of child pornography, one count of transportation of child pornography, and one count of possession of child pornography. He is in federal custody and will be transferred to the Federal Bureau of Prisons.

“Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children,” U.S. Attorney Dena J. King said. “He engaged in the depraved practice of using secret recordings of his victims to create illicit images and videos of them...Tatum also misused artificial intelligence in the worst possible way: to victimize children.”

Related: Deputies: Pastor arrested on child sex charges in Caldwell County

Watch continuous news coverage here:

Copyright 2023 WBTV. All rights reserved.. A North Carolina child psychiatrist was hit with a 40-year prison sentence Wednesday for using artificial intelligence to transform innocent pictures of children into intense pornography stills.

David Tatum, 41, will also have to serve 30 years of supervised release for secretly recording multiple teenagers — including his several family members and a patient — getting undressed.

“It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification. And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable,” Robert DeWitt, Special Agent in Charge of the FBI in North Carolina, said in a statement.

The sentencing comes six months after Tatum was convicted of one count of production of child pornography, one count of transportation of child pornography, and one count of possession of child pornography.

The child and adolescent psychiatrist spent five years collecting a trove of child pornography starting in 2016, according to evidence presented at his trial.

That year, he secretly recorded his 15-year-old cousin and other underage family members as they undressed and showered at a family vacation home in Maine.

Tatum recorded a former patient multiple times by directing a camera up her skirt during one of her therapy sessions. She had turned 18 just five days before the visit — but Tatum wrote she was only 17 in his notes, indicating he understood he was filming child pornography, according to court documents.

When his own videos were no longer enough, Tatum turned to a “deep fake” website to digitally alter clothed images of minors making them sexually explicit.

Two of the images Tatum used AI to modify were from a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school, officials said.

When he was finally caught in 2021, Tatum had over 1,000 child pornography titles, including videos containing the phrase “PTHC,” which stands for pre-teen hardcore, according to prosecutors.

Tatum later admitted to being a voyeur.

In addition to his sentence, Tatum was ordered to pay a $100 special assessment per count of conviction and a special assessment totaling $99,000 under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act.

After he is released from federal prison, Tatum will be required to register as a sex offender.. A child psychiatrist is going to federal prison for 40 years after making secret, abusive recordings and using artificial intelligence to make child sexual abuse material, the U.S. Department of Justice announced on Wednesday. If he lives long enough to serve the term, David Tatum, 41, must then register as a sex offender wherever he’ll live or work, and serve 30 years of supervised release.

Jurors in the Western District of North Carolina convicted him on Monday of a count each of production of child pornography, transportation of child pornography and possession of child pornography.

Prosecutors said he secretly recorded a minor undressing and showering. It turned out he made other similar, secret recordings. Victims included one of his patients, who had just turned 18-years-old five days before the recording and was out during an outpatient visit.

He also possessed other images and footage of abuse material.

Tatum also used a web-based AI application to change pictures of clothed minors to make these sexually explicit. These included images of a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school.

“As a child psychiatrist, Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children,” U.S. Attorney Dena J. King of the Western District of North Carolina said in a statement. “Regardless, he engaged in the depraved practice of using secret recordings of his victims to create illicit images and videos of them. Tatum also misused artificial intelligence in the worst possible way: to victimize children. Today’s 40-year sentence underscores our efforts to do all we can to bring justice to child victims. As the field of artificial intelligence advances, my office is committed to prosecuting predators who seek to exploit this technology to inflict harm on children.”

“It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification,” said FBI Charlotte Special Agent in Charge DeWitt. “And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable. The FBI will never stop working to put predators like Tatum behind bars for a very long time.”

Have a tip we should know? [email protected]. Channel 9 has learned more details after a Charlotte child psychiatrist was sentenced to 40 years for sexual exploitation of a minor and using artificial intelligence to create child sex abuse material.

Dr. David Tatum worked for Atrium Health and is now in jail.

U.S. Attorney Dena King said that someone who knows Tatum first reported suspicions to authorities and the investigation identified a total of six victims.

Some were recorded while undressing or in the shower.

None were Tatum’s patients, and none were from Charlotte.

“The evidence showed that Tatum used a web-based artificial intelligence application to alter images of clothed minors to then turn it into child pornography,” said Dena King, the U.S. Attorney for the Western District of North Carolina. “Two of the images that Tatum used the AI to modify were from a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school.”

King said they believe they identified all of Tatum’s victims.

She added that her office has many more cases right now that involve AI technology.

She warned that people should be mindful of the content they post and realize that it can be accessed and misused by people with bad intentions.





©2023 Cox Media Group. A child psychiatrist in Charlotte was sentenced Wednesday to 40 years in prison followed by 30 years of supervised release for the sexual exploitation of a minor and using artificial intelligence (AI) to create child pornography images of minors.

David Tatum, 41, was also ordered to pay restitution in an amount to be determined within 90 days, a $100 special assessment per count of conviction and a special assessment totaling $99,000 under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act (AVAA). After he is released from prison, Tatum will also be required to register with the Sex Offender Registry Board in any state or jurisdiction where he works or resides.

"As a child psychiatrist, Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children," ,” said U.S. Attorney Dena King for the western district of North Carolina. "Regardless, he engaged in the depraved practice of using secret recordings of his victims to create illicit images and videos of them. Tatum also misused artificial intelligence in the worst possible way: to victimize children. The 40-year sentence underscores our efforts to do all we can to bring justice to child victims. As the field of artificial intelligence advances, my office is committed to prosecuting predators who seek to exploit this technology to inflict harm on children."

"It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification," said Special Agent Robert DeWitt of the FBI Charlotte Field Office. "And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable."

According to court documents and evidence presented at trial, between 2016 and 2021, Tatum possessed images and videos of child pornography. In or about July 2016, Tatum secretly recorded a minor while the minor was undressing and showering. A forensic analysis of electronic devices revealed that Tatum produced the video of the minor and possessed it, along with other images and videos of child pornography. According to trial evidence, Tatum made similar recordings of others, including of his patient during an outpatient visit who had just turned 18 years old five days before the recording.

Trial evidence established that Tatum used AI to digitally alter clothed images of minors making them sexually explicit.

On May 4, a federal jury in Charlotte convicted Tatum of one count of production of child pornography, one count of transportation of child pornography and one count of possession of child pornography.

Tatum is currently in federal custody and will be transferred to the custody of the Federal Bureau of Prisons upon designation of a federal facility.

The FBI investigated the case.

This case was brought as part of Project Safe Childhood, a nationwide initiative to combat the epidemic of child sexual exploitation and abuse, launched in May 2006 by the Justice Department. For more information about Project Safe Childhood, please visit projectsafechildhood.gov.. CHARLOTTE, N.C. — A Charlotte child psychiatrist, convicted of using artificial intelligence to create child pornography, was sentenced 40 years in prison Wednesday.

What You Need To Know Forty-one-year-old David Tatum was charged with sexually exploiting children and using AI to create child pornography



Evidence showed Tatum used AI to digitally alter the clothing on children in photos



After his release, he will have to register as a sex offender in every state and jurisdiction he works and lives in

The announcement came Wednesday from U.S. Attorney Dena J. King. The charges against David Tatum, 41, come after he digitally altered the clothing in images of children making them sexually explicit.

“As a child psychiatrist, Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children,” King said.

Evidence presented during his trial showed Tatum possessed photos and videos between 2016 and 2021, including videos he secretly recorded of a patient getting undressed and showering. He was convicted by a federal jury in Charlotte on one count of child pornography, one count of transportation of child pornography and one count of possession of child pornography in May.

Robert M. DeWitt, FBI special agent in charge, also released a statement describing the findings as horrific and hard to believe.

“And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable,” DeWitt said.

Tatum was ordered to pay restitution in addition to his sentence. He was also fined a $100 special assessment fee for each conviction and special assessments totaling $99,000 under the Amy, Vicky and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act (AVAA).

Tatum will be required to register as a sex offender in any state he works and lives in after his release. He is also sentenced to 30 years of supervised release.. 1/1 David Tatum, 41

CHARLOTTE, N.C. – A Charlotte child psychiatrist was sentenced to 40 years in prison for producing and possessing child pornographic images and videos, according to the United States Department of Justice.

The attorney’s office states that David Tatum, 41, sexually exploited a child and used artificial intelligence to create child pornographic images of minors.

Tatum was ordered to pay an undetermined restitution within 90 days, a $100 special assessment per count of conviction and a $99,000 special assessment under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornographic Victim Assistance Act.

Evidence showed that Tatum possessed child pornographic images from 2016 to 2021. Around July of 2016, court documents revealed that Tatum secretly recorded a minor undressing and showering.

Tatum also made similar secret recordings of others, including one of his patients that turned 18 years old five days prior to recording them.

Additionally, trial evidence revealed that Tatum used a web-based AI application to digitally alter clothed images of minors into child pornography. Two of the images Tatum used to modify were from a school dance and a photo commemorating the first day of school.

Tatum was convicted of three child pornographic-related charges by a federal jury on May 4th of this year.

Following Tatum’s 40-year prison sentence, he will require 30 years of supervised release. He will also be required to register with the Sex Offender Registry Board in any state or jurisdiction where he works or lives.. CHARLOTTE, N.C. (FOX Carolina) - A child psychiatrist was convicted by a federal jury of sexually exploiting children and using artificial intelligence to create child pornography.

David Tatum, 41, has been a licensed DO with the North Carolina Medical Board since 2016. Between 2016 and 2021, he possessed child pornography while working as a psychiatrist in Charlotte specializing in children.

After his arrest in 2022, Tatum pleaded not guilty during his arraignment and was placed under house arrest with an ankle monitor. He was subsequently ordered not to practice medicine.

During Tatum’s trial, evidence came out that he secretly recorded a child while the victim was undressing and showering. He made similar recordings of others including a victim during an outpatient visit five days after their 18th birthday.

He also used artificial intelligence to alter pictures of clothed children, for example, one from a school dance and one from a first-day photo, into child pornography.

“It is horrific to believe anyone would secretly record children undressing and showering for their own sexual gratification. And when the evidence proves that person is a doctor entrusted to help children through difficult mental health situations, it is inconceivable,” said FBI Charlotte Special Agent in Charge DeWitt. “The FBI will never stop working to put predators like Tatum behind bars for a very long time.”

On May 4, a federal jury convicted Tatum of production of child pornography, transportation of child pornography and possession of child pornography.

He was sentenced on Wednesday to 40 years in prison followed by 30 years of supervised release. He will be required to register as a sex offender. He also has to pay restitution and a $99,000 special assessment under the Amy, Vicky, and Andy Child Pornography Victim Assistance Act (AVAA).

According to court records, Tatum received treatment for sex addiction at “an inpatient center for those who struggle with compulsive sexual fantasy.”

In a letter to the judge president over his case, Tatum’s mother wrote, “Ultimately, his struggles with pornography and his addiction to it took hold of him. I don’t say this to absolve him blame or to excuse what he has done, but to express that he should not be given up on. He is not merely a piece of trash that should be thrown away. He is a good, kind human being who has made some terrible choices.”

Tatum’s sister also wrote a letter to the judge, asking for the verdict to be less than life in prison. Below is an excerpt from the letter:

"I’ve been struggling to come to terms with this, but two things can be true simultaneously. I love my brother, and he did horrible things. The choices he made hurt all of us: the victims, our families, me, and himself. Life as we knew it is over and we’re all facing how to move forward. That’s what made me decide to write on behalf of my brother today. The dissonance between the man I thought my brother to be and the man who committed these crimes is jarring. The David I knew was a kind brother, loyal friend, and an engaged father. The love for his daughter is obvious to anyone who has seen them interact. Yet, his disregard for the autonomy of other people cannot be ignored. It’s clear to me that his actions are the result of a deep compulsion, one that blinded his morality and led him to the fallacy that what he was doing wouldn’t harm anyone. Addiction is a disease, and this particular addiction is, rightfully, much harder for society to approach. The stigma of seeking help for sex-related addiction makes it largely unattainable. My brother is ill and requires treatment. I’ve seen the difference in him since he started treatment, and I worry about his ability to receive adequate care while he’s incarcerated. I hope this can be taken into consideration when it comes to his placement. I’m also asking for leniency for his sentencing- I do not think his crimes justify life in prison. Give him the chance for redemption, I know in my heart he’s capable of more."

“As a child psychiatrist, Tatum knew the damaging, long-lasting impact sexual exploitation has on the wellbeing of victimized children. Regardless, he engaged in the depraved practice of using secret recordings of his victims to create illicit images and videos of them,” said U.S. Attorney Dena J. King. “Tatum also misused artificial intelligence in the worst possible way: to victimize children. Today’s 40-year sentence underscores our efforts to do all we can to bring justice to child victims. As the field of artificial intelligence advances, my office is committed to prosecuting predators who seek to exploit this technology to inflict harm on children.”

Copyright 2023 WHNS. All rights reserved.