There was nothing in Drew Ortiz's author biography at Sports Illustrated to suggest that he was anything other than human.

"Drew has spent much of his life outdoors, and is excited to guide you through his never-ending list of the best products to keep you from falling to the perils of nature," it read. "Nowadays, there is rarely a weekend that goes by where Drew isn't out camping, hiking, or just back on his parents' farm."

The only problem? Outside of Sports Illustrated, Drew Ortiz doesn't seem to exist. He has no social media presence and no publishing history. And even more strangely, his profile photo on Sports Illustrated is for sale on a website that sells AI-generated headshots, where he's described as "neutral white young-adult male with short brown hair and blue eyes."

Ortiz isn't the only AI-generated author published by Sports Illustrated, according to a person involved with the creation of the content who asked to be kept anonymous to protect them from professional repercussions.

"There's a lot," they told us of the fake authors. "I was like, what are they? This is ridiculous. This person does not exist."

"At the bottom [of the page] there would be a photo of a person and some fake description of them like, 'oh, John lives in Houston, Texas. He loves yard games and hanging out with his dog, Sam.' Stuff like that," they continued. "It's just crazy."

The AI authors' writing often sounds like it was written by an alien; one Ortiz article, for instance, warns that volleyball "can be a little tricky to get into, especially without an actual ball to practice with."

According to a second person involved in the creation of the Sports Illustrated content who also asked to be kept anonymous, that's because it's not just the authors' headshots that are AI-generated. At least some of the articles themselves, they said, were churned out using AI as well.

"The content is absolutely AI-generated," the second source said, "no matter how much they say that it's not."

After we reached out with questions to the magazine's publisher, The Arena Group, all the AI-generated authors disappeared from Sports Illustrated's site without explanation.

Initially, our questions received no response. But after we published this story, an Arena Group spokesperson provided the following statement that blamed a contractor for the content:

Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate. The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce. A number of AdVon's e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised. AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans. According to AdVon, their writers, editors, and researchers create and curate content and follow a policy that involves using both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software on all content. However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we don't condone — and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.

It sounds like The Arena Group's investigation pretty much just involved asking AdVon whether the content was AI-generated, and taking them at their word when they said it wasn't. Our sources familiar with the creation of the content disagree.

The statement also never addresses the core allegation of our story: that Sports Illustrated published content from nonexistent writers with AI-generated headshots. The implication seems to be that AdVon invented fake writers, assigned them fake biographies and AI-generated headshots, and then stopped right there, only publishing content written by old-fashioned humans. Maybe that's true, but we doubt it.

Regardless, the AI content marks a staggering fall from grace for Sports Illustrated, which in past decades won numerous National Magazine Awards for its sports journalism and published work by literary giants ranging from William Faulkner to John Updike.

But now that it's under the management of The Arena Group, parts of the magazine seem to have devolved into a Potemkin Village in which phony writers are cooked up out of thin air, outfitted with equally bogus biographies and expertise to win readers' trust, and used to pump out AI-generated buying guides that are monetized by affiliate links to products that provide a financial kickback when readers click them.

Do you know anything about The Arena Group's use of AI-generated content? Shoot us an email at tips@futurism.com. We can keep you anonymous.

Making the whole thing even more dubious, these AI-generated personas are periodically scrubbed from existence in favor of new ones.

Sometime this summer, for example, Ortiz disappeared from Sports Illustrated's site entirely, his profile page instead redirecting to that of a "Sora Tanaka." Again, there's no online record of a writer by that name — but Tanaka's profile picture is for sale on the same AI headshot marketplace as Ortiz, where she's listed as "joyful asian young-adult female with long brown hair and brown eyes."

"Sora has always been a fitness guru, and loves to try different foods and drinks," read Tanaka's bio. "Ms. Tanaka is thrilled to bring her fitness and nutritional expertise to the Product Reviews Team, and promises to bring you nothing but the best of the best."

But Tanaka didn't last, either. Eventually she also disappeared, replaced by yet another profile that carried no headshot at all, which Sports Illustrated deleted along with the other AI-generated content after we reached out.

It wasn't just author profiles that the magazine repeatedly replaced. Each time an author was switched out, the posts they supposedly penned would be reattributed to the new persona, with no editor's note explaining the change in byline.

None of the articles credited to Ortiz or the other names contained any disclosure about the use of AI or that the writer wasn't real, though they did eventually gain a disclaimer explaining that the content was "created by a 3rd party," and that the "Sports Illustrated editorial staff are not involved in the creation of this content."

Though Sports Illustrated's AI-generated authors and their articles disappeared after we asked about them, similar operations appear to be alive and well elsewhere in The Arena Group's portfolio.

Take TheStreet, a financial publication cofounded by Jim Cramer in 1996 that The Arena Group bought for $16.5 million in 2019. Like at Sports Illustrated, we found authors at TheStreet with highly specific biographies detailing seemingly flesh-and-blood humans with specific areas of expertise — but with profile photos traceable to that same AI face website. And like at Sports Illustrated, these fake writers are periodically wiped from existence and their articles reattributed to new names, with no disclosure about the use of AI.

Sometimes TheStreet's efforts to remove the fake writers can be sloppy. On its review section's title page, for instance, the site still proudly flaunts the expertise of AI-generated contributors who have since been deleted, linking to writer profiles it describes as ranging "from stay-at-home dads to computer and information analysts." This team, the site continues, "is comprised of a well-rounded group of people who bring varying backgrounds and experiences to the table."

People? We're not so sure.

The "stay-at-home dad" linked in that sentence above, for instance, is a so-called "Domino Abrams" — "a pro at home cleaning and maintenance," at least until he was expunged from the site — whose profile picture can again be found on that same site that sells AI-generated headshots.

Or look at "Denise McNamara," the "information analyst" that TheStreet boasted about — "her extensive personal experience with electronics allows her to share her findings with others online" — whose profile picture is once again listed on the same AI headshot marketplace. Or "Nicole Merrifield," an alleged "first grade teacher" who "loves helping people," but whose profile is again from that AI headshot site. (At some point this year, Abrams, McNamara, and Merrifield were replaced by bylines whose profile pictures aren't for sale on the AI headshot site.)

Basic scrutiny shows that the quality of the AI authors' posts is often poor, with bizarre-sounding language and glaring formatting discrepancies.

This article about personal finance by the AI-generated Merrifield, for example, starts off with the sweeping libertarian claim that "your financial status translates to your value in society."

After that bold premise, the article explains that "people with strong financial status are revered and given special advantages everywhere around the world," and launches into a numbered list of how you can "improve your finance status" for yourself. Each number on what should be a five-point list, though, is just number one. Mistakes happen, but we can't imagine that anyone who can't count to five would give stellar financial advice.

Abysmal-quality AI content, though, shouldn't be surprising at The Arena Group.

Back in February, when the company first started publishing AI-generated health advice at its magazine Men's Journal, we found that its first story was riddled with errors, prompting it to issue a massive correction.

Before that, when The Arena Group first announced its foray into AI, its CEO Ross Levinsohn promised in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that its quality would be outstanding.

"It’s not about 'crank out AI content and do as much as you can,'" he told the newspaper early this year. "Google will penalize you for that and more isn't better; better is better."

Needless to say, neither fake authors who are suddenly replaced with different names nor deplorable-quality AI-generated content with no disclosure amount to anything resembling good journalism, and to see it published by a once-iconic magazine like Sports Illustrated is disheartening. Bylines exist for a reason: they give credit where it's due, and just as importantly, they let readers hold writers accountable.

The undisclosed AI content is a direct affront to the fabric of media ethics, in other words, not to mention a perfect recipe for eroding reader trust. And at the end of the day, it's just remarkably irresponsible behavior that we shouldn't see anywhere — let alone normalized by a high-visibility publisher.

The Arena Group is also hardly alone, either. As powerful generative AI tools have debuted over the past few years, many publishers have quickly attempted to use the tech to churn out monetizable content.

In almost every case, though, these efforts to cut out human journalists have backfired embarrassingly.

We caught CNET and Bankrate, both owned by Red Ventures, publishing barely-disclosed AI content that was filled with factual mistakes and even plagiarism; in the ensuing storm of criticism, CNET issued corrections to more than half its AI-generated articles. G/O Media also published AI-generated material on its portfolio of sites, resulting in embarrassing bungles at Gizmodo and The A.V. Club. We caught BuzzFeed publishing slapdash AI-generated travel guides. And USA Today and other Gannett newspapers were busted publishing hilariously garbled AI-generated sports roundups that one of the company's own sports journalists described as "embarrassing," saying they "shouldn't ever" have been published.

If any media organization finds a way to engage with generative AI in a way that isn't either woefully ill-advised or actively unethical, we're all ears. In the meantime, forgive us if we don't hold our breath.

Disclosure: Futurism's parent company, Recurrent Ventures, previously worked with AdVon in 2022 via its partnership to distribute select content on third-party e-commerce platforms. This content was written by Recurrent’s contributors. Presently, Recurrent maintains a business relationship with them to test Commerce content internationally for select brands (of which Futurism is not one). AdVon content has never been published on Futurism or any of Recurrent’s websites.

More on AI-generated journalism: USA Today Updates Every AI-Generated Sports Article to Correct "Errors". . CNN —

Digital publisher The Arena Group, which operates household brands such as Sports Illustrated and The Street, fired its chief executive on Monday amid a larger C-suite bloodbath, a spokesperson for the company told CNN.

A spokesperson for The Arena Group declined to go into further detail to explain the ouster of Ross Levinsohn, who served as chief executive for three years. But the move came after an embarrassing debacle in which Sports Illustrated was caught publishing stories with fake author names and profile photos generated by artificial intelligence.

Levinsohn was replaced, effective immediately, by interim chief executive Manoj Bhargava, the 5-Hour Energy founder who owns a majority stake in The Arena Group, said Vince Bodiford, a spokesperson for Bhargava.

Levinsohn’s termination comes less than a week after The Arena Group fired three of its major executives: operations president and chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

“All of the media brands, including Sports Illustrated, will continue to operate with the management of those verticals, while the company just takes a broad view of operations and how to improve the business overall,” Bodiford told CNN.

Asked whether the changes have anything to do with allegations that Sports Illustrated used AI to write articles, Bodiford said, “we have nothing further to add to the company’s prior statements regarding A.I.”. The publisher of Sports Illustrated, The Arena Group, announced Monday that its CEO, Ross Levinsohn, has been terminated in the latest round of firings at the company in the wake of an artificial intelligence scandal.

Levinsohn will be replaced in the interim by Manoj Bhargava, the founder and CEO of Innovations Ventures, known for creating the 5-hour Energy drink, The Arena Group said in a statement.

A reason for Levinsohn’s termination was not shared. The company said its board “took actions to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company.”

The company terminated operations president and chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster last week.

Sports Illustrated fell into hot water last month after an article on the science and tech news site Futurism accused the former sports news giant of using AI-generated content and author headshots without disclosing it to their readers.

The authors' names and bios did not connect to real people, Futurism reported.

When Futurism asked The Arena Group for comment on the use of AI, all the AI-generated authors disappeared from the Sports Illustrated website. The Arena Group later said the articles were product reviews and licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce, which assured it that all the articles were written and edited by humans and that writers were allowed to use pen names.

Neither last week's Arena Group firings nor Levinsohn's termination addressed the AI controversy.. The Arena Group, publisher of Sports Illustrated, has fired the magazine’s CEO not long after it was revealed Sports Illustrated had published articles written by fake authors with AI-generated headshots and biographies.

The Arena Group’s board announced on Monday that CEO Ross Levinsohn had his employment terminated, with Manoj Bhargava named as interim chief executive. The board said it followed a meeting on actions to “improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company”.

The release did not mention the AI scandal from November, which was spurred by an investigative report published by the science and technology news publication Futurism.

Among fake profiles uncovered by Futurism was that of purported author “Sora Tanaka” which claims she is a product reviewer. The page said: “Sora has always been a fitness guru, and loves to try different foods and drinks. Ms Tanaka is thrilled to bring her fitness and nutritional expertise to the Product Reviews Team, and promises to bring you nothing but the best of the best.”

Tanaka is not a real person.

The Arena Group, which acquired Sports Illustrated in 2019, denied the allegations, and said the articles in question were sourced commercial content from a third-party advertising company, AdVon Commerce.

A spokesperson for the Arena Group wrote in a statement at the time: “Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate.

“A number of AdVon’s e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised. AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans … However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy – actions we strongly condemn – and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.”

The company cut ties with AdVon and removed its content from Arena websites.

Sports Illustrated, first published in 1954, is known as well for its swimsuit issues, often featuring covers of fashion models, athletes and other celebrities in bikinis. But, as Futurism noted, it also once published contributions from famed writers such as William Faulkner and John Updike.

After a round of layoffs earlier this year, Levinsohn indicated that Sports Illustrated would incorporate AI into its journalism, but said it would never replace journalism.

“While AI will never replace journalism, reporting, or crafting and editing a story, rapidly improving AI technologies can create enterprise value for our brands and partners,” Levinsohn said in February.

Last week Arena terminated the employment of operations president and COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

Bhargava is the founder of the company behind the 5-Hour Energy Drink product.. Sports Illustrated accused of passing AI articles off as human-created content

The publisher of Sports Illustrated has ousted its chief executive officer following public backlash over the sport's magazine's alleged use of AI to write stories.

The Arena Group's termination of CEO Ross Levinsohn came as the media giant's board members met on Monday to consider measures to "improve [the company's] operational efficiency and revenue," the company said Monday in a statement posted on its website. The decision comes after SI became steeped in public controversy over allegations it used AI to generate content and fictitious author bios for its website.

The alleged AI-generated content was first reported by tech-focused publication Futurism. According to a post by a spokesperson for Arena Group on SI's X account in November, the questionable content included articles and product reviews from AdVon Commerce, a third-party content provider.

"AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans," the X post read.

Stories removed from site

Though it denied the report that the famed publication produced articles written by artificial intelligence, Arena Group pulled the alleged AI-generated stories from SI.com pending an ongoing internal investigation.

Arena Group did not immediately respond to CBS MoneyWatch's request for comment.

Manoj Bhargava, the 5-Hour Energy founder who owns a majority stake in Arena Group, was named the company's interim CEO on Monday, according to the company's statement.

Levinsohn stepped into the CEO role at Arena Group — which owns more than 250 brands reaching more than 100 million readers — in 2020, his LinkedIn profile shows. He has held senior leadership roles at HBO and CBS Sportsline, in addition to serving as Yahoo's interim CEO in a career that spans three decades, according to the profile.

Arena Group's latest firing follows three terminations at the company last week, including that of COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

The company's shares were trading more than 5% lower on Tuesday as of 2 p.m. EST.. The corporate owner of Sports Illustrated is denying a report that the famed publication produced articles written by artificial intelligence under fake author bylines, while noting that it has withdrawn the stories pending an investigation.

Futurism reported Monday that Sport Illustrated had used AI to generate articles, as well as headshots and biographical information for fictitious writers. The technology publication also said that information about the purported authors "disappeared from Sports Illustrated's site without explanation" after Futurism approached The Arena Group, a New York-based media company whose other publishing brands include Men's Journal, Parade and TheStreet.com.

The Arena Group said in a statement posted on social media on Tuesday that the company's "initial investigation" found that Futurism's report "is not accurate." The articles highlighted by Futurism were produced by human writers for AdVon Commerce, which The Arena Group said formerly had a licensing deal with Sports Illustrated to write product reviews and other e-commerce content.

"AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans," a spokesperson for The Arena Group said in its statement. "However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we strongly condemn."

Sports Illustrated is removing the articles produced by AdVon while The Arena Group continues its investigation, the media company said. Sports Illustrated has also ended its partnership with AdVon, according to The Arena Group, which didn't respond to CBS MoneyWatch's request for comment. Stephen Cannella, co-editor-in-chief of Sports Illustrated, did not respond to an inquiry sent to his LinkedIn account.

Futurism said Tuesday that it stands by its report.

"Arena's response is just so bizarre, as everybody's been pointing out online," the publication said in a statement to CBS MoneyWatch. "The idea that people writing product reviews for volleyballs would need to protect their identities with pseudonyms is obviously absurd. And as for AdVon telling Sports Illustrated that all its articles are written by humans? Its employees disagree, and we've got a new story coming out about that soon."

Need for guardrails

Although The Arena Group denies using AI to produce stories for Sports Illustrated, the controversy underscores the question of how the media industry and other content producers should address the "lack of robust ethical guardrails" on using the technology, Benjamin Lange, an AI ethicist and research group lead at the Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich told CBS MoneyWatch.

"Journalistic ethics requires adherence to basic principles of honesty, trust, accuracy and objectivity," he said.

Several publishers and other companies have had to retract articles this year that were produced by AI. In January, for example, CNET published corrections for a number of AI-generated stories after critics noted they were rife with errors. In August, Microsoft in August pulled a computer-generated travel guide from its website after readers pointed out that it recommended tourists in Ottawa, Canada, visit a local food bank.

Shares of The Arena Group, which is listed on Nasdaq, plunged more than 22% on Tuesday to $2.09 following Futurism's report. The company, formerly known as TheMaven, rebranded itself in 2021 and is led by Ross Levinsohn, who previously served as CEO of Sports Illustrated. Earlier this month, The Arena Group announced that it had merged with Bridge Media Networks, which produces news, sports and other content.. The publisher of Sports Illustrated has fired its chief executive shortly after an investigative report claimed the American magazine had published stories by fake authors with headshots generated by artificial intelligence.

The Arena Group announced it had terminated Ross Levinsohn’s contract with immediate effect, and named Manoj Bhargava as interim chief executive officer.

Futurism, a science and technology title, published an investigation in November that accused Sports Illustrated of using machine technology to invent biographies for journalists. Arena Group responded by saying its own internal review suggested Futurism’s story was “not accurate”.

It made no mention of the investigation when announcing the termination of Levinsohn. In a statement, Arena said the board had taken action “to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company”.. The shock waves from Sports Illustrated’s unethical use of AI-generated content, which last week led to some top-level executives at the media outlet’s parent company being canned, have apparently claimed an even bigger victim.

That news came yesterday as The Arena Group, which publishes SI, fired its CEO, Ross Levinsohn. In a statement, the company did not mention the recent AI fiasco and said the move was made “to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company,” but we can all connect the dots.

Earlier in his career, Levinsohn faced multiple workplace accusations of sexual harassment and creating a “frat house environment.” Although an internal review cleared him, he admitted under oath that he ranked the “hotness” of female colleagues and openly speculated about whether one female co-worker had a side job as a stripper and/or had slept with another co-worker. That didn’t keep The Arena Group from letting him serve as their CEO — until now.

Levinsohn will be replaced on an interim basis by The Arena Group’s majority owner, Manoj Bhargava, who purchased a 65% stake in the company in August after making his fortune as the founder of the dietary supplement 5-Hour Energy. As you may recall, Bhargava introduced himself to the SI newsroom last week in a “meandering video call” in which he reportedly insulted the staff and went off on a rant about recycling.

Neil Leifer could not be reached for comment.. When the AI scandal at Sports Illustrated broke a few days ago, I initially wrote something about it but then decided not to publish it because (a) it’s not uni-related and (b) saying anything critical about SI at this point kinda feels like punching down. But then a bunch of readers got in touch to ask what I thought of the situation, so I’ve decided to publish something after all.

Disclosure/reminder: I wrote a decent amount for SI in 2019, first as a freelancer and then, for about seven weeks, as a staff writer. My SI archive is here. When SI was sold in October of 2019, I was among 40 or so employees who were laid off by the new owners (thereby making me the answer to a sports media trivia question). Most of the people I worked with at SI were let go at the same time I was, and most of the remaining ones have left since then, although I see that one editor I worked with is still there.

Anyway: In case you missed it earlier this week, Futurism writer Maggie Harrison had a devastating report on how a bunch of articles on SI’s website — product reviews, mostly — were apparently written by AI. The articles, many of which included laughably bad writing and formatting, included phony bylines for non-existent authors, complete with AI-generated author head shots that were easily traced to an AI stock photo source. As Harrison wrote, the incident “marks a staggering fall from grace” for the once-celebrated media outlet.

SI issued an incomplete and unconvincing denial, saying that the articles in question — which were scrubbed from SI.com shortly after Harrison’s story was published — were produced not by AI but, rather, by a third-party vendor to which SI had outsourced some of its content (a questionable practice to begin with). SI said the vendor had used phony bylines “to protect author privacy” — a nebulous statement that raises more questions than it answers and for which SI provided no further explanation. The whole thing sounds really tawdry and pathetic. Get the full story by checking out Harrison’s excellent article.

So what do I think? For starters, this is just the latest evidence that I dodged a bullet when SI cut me loose, because the situation there has apparently become more toxic and ethically suspect by the day. (In case you’ve forgotten some of the previous nonsense, look here and here.)

This is the part where I’m supposed to say, “This is so sad. I grew up reading SI and remember how much I looked forward to each issue. They did world-class journalism for years, and now it’s come to this.”

But let’s get real: That SI, the one that so many of us grew up with, hasn’t existed for a long time. SI still has some good writers on the payroll, most notably Tom Verducci and Pat Forde, but at this point it’s basically a zombie brand, a hollowed-out shell whose old identity exists primarily in name, logo, and memory, not in substance. Since 2018, SI has been sold twice. Its current owner, the Authentic Brands Group, isn’t even a publisher. ABG collects legacy brands and added SI to its portfolio because it envisioned opening a bunch of SI spas, SI hotels, SI restaurants, SI gyms. (That hasn’t exactly worked out for them — shocker — and the decline of SI as a respected media operation surely won’t help.) Since ABG isn’t a publisher, they license the publishing operation to a bunch of VC-backed dude-bro douchebags called The Arena Group (formerly TheMaven), whose CEO previously faced multiple workplace accusations of sexual harassment and creating a “frat house environment.” Although an internal review cleared him, he admitted under oath that he ranked the “hotness” of female colleagues and openly speculated about whether one female co-worker had a side job as a stripper and/or had slept with another co-worker.

When you look at all of that, this week’s report about SI publishing AI-generated content — and then blaming it on a rogue vendor, which is barely a step up from “The dog ate my homework” — isn’t so surprising. On the contrary, it’s perfectly in keeping with what this organization now is, and we should expect more of the same in the weeks and months to come.

It’s worth noting that SI isn’t the only media outlet that’s looked at AI and thought, “Hey, now we can publish content without having to pay those pesky writers!” These adventures have generally not gone well, at least so far. Gannett, which owns a few hundred newspapers across America, decided to “pause” its use of AI a few months ago after a bunch of AI-generated sports reports went viral for all the wrong reasons. Less than two months later, Gannett was fending off accusations of posting AI-generated content on its shopping website. Other outlets using AI in ethically dubious ways lately have included the A.V. Club, BuzzFeed, CNET, Gizmodo (another place I’ve written for), and others, as desperate publishers flail about in search of a viable business model in the era of internet media.

On the other hand: An AI-generated swimsuit issue would likely be extremely entertaining, so let’s hope SI gives that a shot. Hey, no need to pay those pesky models and photographers! What could possibly go wrong?. The chief executive of Sports Illustrated magazine has been sacked after claims it ran articles by fake authors generated using artificial intelligence.

The Arena Group, the magazine’s publisher, said it had fired Ross Levinsohn in an attempt to “improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company”.

It made no reference to an investigation by Futurism, a tech news website, last month that found Sports Illustrated had published articles generated by AI, with headshots of fake journalists attached.

The publisher denied that it had used AI to produce articles, claiming the content had been created by a third party advertising company, AdVon Commerce. It said the fictitious names attached to the stories were pseudonyms, not AI-generated personas.

The investigation found a profile page of a product reviewer, Sora Tanaka, who does not exist but was described as a journalist who “has always been a fitness guru, and loves to try different foods and drinks”.

Fake name attached to a headshot

Another article about volleyball was purportedly written by Drew Ortiz, which Futurism claimed was a fake name attached to an AI-generated headshot.

The publisher said at the time: “Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate.”

The company said it would sever ties with AdVon Commerce over its unauthorised use of pseudonyms.

Mr Levinsohn’s departure will see Manoj Bhargava, an Indian businessman, step in as interim CEO before the post is filled. It follows rounds of layoffs, including in February, when 17 staff lost their jobs.

Sports Illustrated, launched in 1954, became the first magazine to reach a circulation of one million readers and become known for its annual “swimsuit issue”, featuring women wearing bathing costumes on its cover.

The magazine was sold in 2019 to Maven, a digital media company that has since rebranded to The Arena Group.. . NEW YORK (AP) — Computer-generated writers ... writing computer-generated stories?

Sports Illustrated is the latest media company to see its reputation damaged by being less than forthcoming — if not outright dishonest — about who or what is writing its stories at the dawn of the artificial intelligence age.

The once-powerful publication said it was firing a company that produced articles for its website written under the byline of authors who apparently don’t exist. But it denied a published report that stories themselves were written by an artificial intelligence tool.

Earlier this year, experiments with AI went awry at both the Gannett newspaper chain and the CNET technology website. Many companies are testing the new technology at a time when human workers fear it could cost jobs. But the process is fraught in journalism, which builds and markets its values-based products around the notions of truth and transparency.

While there’s nothing wrong in media companies experimenting with artificial intelligence, “the mistake is in trying to hide it, and in doing it poorly,” said Tom Rosenstiel, a University of Maryland professor who teaches journalism ethics.

“If you want to be in the truth-telling business, which journalists claim they do, you shouldn’t tell lies,” Rosenstiel said. “A secret is a form of lying.”

CONFLICTING ACCOUNTS OF WHAT HAPPENED

Sports Illustrated, now run as a website and once-monthly publication by the Arena Group, at one time was a weekly in the Time Inc. stable of magazines known for its sterling writing. “Its ambitions were grand,” said Jeff Jarvis, author of “Magazine,” a book he describes as an elegy for the industry.

On Monday, the Futurism website reported that Sports Illustrated used stories for product reviews that had authors it could not identify. Futurism found a picture of one author listed, Drew Ortiz, on a website that sells AI-generated portraits.

The magazine’s author profile said that “Drew has spent much of his life outdoors, and is excited to guide you through his never-ending list of the best products to keep you from falling to the perils of nature.”

Upon questioning Sports Illustrated, Futurism said all of the authors with AI-generated portraits disappeared from the magazine’s website. No explanation was offered.

Futurism quoted an unnamed person at the magazine who said artificial intelligence was used in the creation of some content as well — “no matter how much they say that it’s not.”

Sports Illustrated said the articles in question were created by a third-party company, AdVon Commerce, which assured the magazine that they were written and edited by humans. AdVon had its writers use a pen name, “actions we don’t condone,” Sports Illustrated said.

“We are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership,” the magazine said. A message to AdVon wasn’t immediately returned on Tuesday.

In a statement, the Sports Illustrated Union said it was horrified by the Futurism story.

“We demand answers and transparency from Arena group management about what exactly has been published under the SI name,” the union said. “We demand the company commit to adhering to basic journalistic standards, including not publishing computer-written stories by fake people.”

NOT THE FIRST SUCH SITUATION

Gannett paused an experiment at some of its newspapers this summer in which AI was used to generate articles on high school sports events, after errors were discovered. The articles carried the byline “LedeAI.”

Some of the unpleasant publicity that resulted might have been avoided if the newspapers had been explicit about the role of technology, and how it helped create articles that journalists might not have been available to do, Jarvis said. Gannett said a lack of staff had nothing to do with the experiment.

This past winter, it was reported that CNET had used AI to create explanatory news articles about financial service topics attributed to “CNET Money Staff.” The only way for readers to learn that technology was involved in the writing was to click on that author attribution.

Only after its experiment was discovered and written about by other publications did CNET discuss it with readers. In a note, then-editor Connie Guglielmo said that 77 machine-generated stories were posted, and that several required corrections. The site subsequently made it more clear when AI is being used in story creation.

“The process may not always be easy or pretty, but we’re going to continue embracing it, and any new technology that we believe makes life better,” Guglielmo wrote.

Other companies have been more up front about their experiments. Buzzfeed, for example, attributed a travel article on Santa Barbara, Calif., to writer Emma Heegar and Buzzy the Robot, “our creative AI assistant.”

“We’ll be developing content that is AI-native — cool new things that you couldn’t do at all without AI — and things that are enhanced by AI but created by humans,” Buzzfeed said in a note to readers.

The Associated Press has been using technology to assist in articles about financial earnings reports since 2014, and more recently in some sports stories. At the end of each such story is a note that explains technology’s role in its production, a spokeswoman said.

For instance, a short article about an upcoming NBA matchup earlier this month had this note at the end: “The Associated Press created this story using technology provided by Data Skrive and data from Sportradar.”

___

David Bauder writes about media for The Associated Press. Follow him at http://twitter.com/dbauder. Sports Illustrated was an icon among magazines. Now it’s a cautionary tale showing the dangers of private equity owners willing to embrace the automated production of slop.

Quick, name five classic American magazines.

Did you say Sports Illustrated ? I did. And I’m not even a sports guy. But if you’re of a certain age, you know Sports Illustrated. Along with, say, People, Time and National Geographic, it has long lined the dentist offices, neighbors’ doormats and coffee tables of your life. It’s an institution. At one point, it boasted 3 million subscribers . It’s won numerous awards and accolades. The evening news would do whole segments about its swimsuit issue.

Today, it’s pumping out third-rate articles by AI-generated writers in a darkening corner of the internet. It’s a stunning fall for one of the great icons of American sports journalism. So what happened? How did such a celebrated publication get here? The answers point us to one of the most pressing — and unlikely — dangers posed by the ongoing AI boom.

First, the facts: On Monday, the tech and culture site Futurism published an expose that revealed Sports Illustrated was publishing bizarre and badly written articles attributed to authors that didn’t exist.

Advertisement

The reporters traced the fake authors’ headshots to a website that sells AI-generated images, and sources told them that the stories they allegedly wrote were produced by AI, too. “The content is absolutely AI-generated,” one said, “no matter how much they say that it’s not.” When contacted, Arena Group, Sports Illustrated’s publisher, deleted all of the suspicious content and, in a statement , denied it was created by AI. Arena blamed the mess on AdVon, a third-party company hired to produce content.

The saga has been heatedly discussed by journalists and media watchers, and lamented by onetime fans of the iconic brand. Generative AI very much remains a hot-button topic, and the question of whether it’s ethical — or a good idea — to use AI has driven much of the conversation.

But it’s worth backing up and looking at the bigger picture here, and the conditions that led to the use of such sketchy AI in the first place. Because this story is as much about bad management, sheer laziness and how relentlessly profit-seeking corporate management can erode our cultural institutions as it is about any given technology.

Sports Illustrated was already in dire shape long before Arena brought in the AI. Amid economic challenges that confront all print media, the magazine’s revenue and subscriber base declined over the 2010s. It repeatedly downsized, switched from a weekly to a monthly publication schedule and was sold by its owner, Time Inc., to a company called Authentic Brands Group, or ABG, which is in the business of inking lucrative licensing deals. ABG then sold a 10-year license to publish Sports Illustrated to our new friends at Arena Group.

As a result of this arrangement, Sports Illustrated branding is now showing up both on dietary supplements and on thousands of hastily produced blog posts. After all, on the publication side of the business, “Arena’s options for generating revenue are somewhat limited, encouraging a daily churn of articles,” as the New York Times reports . “Hundreds of sites dedicated to individual teams — helmed by non-staff writers paid small sums — were created with little oversight and diluted what it meant for ‘Sports Illustrated’ to write something.” Arena has continued to fire editors and staffers, while enforcing weekly quotas of article production. (On the licensing side, business is booming — ABG says it has doubled Sports Illustrated’s earnings . That’s a lot of Sports Illustrated-brand diet pills. It also launched an online SI-branded casino in 2021.)

In other words, Sports Illustrated is run by not one but two vampiric entities with markedly little interest in the magazine’s erstwhile core mission — you know, the thing that made it so beloved in the first place, doing good sports journalism — and every interest in maximizing profits at every opportunity. And they have squeezed the lemon until it was dry.

Advertisement

And here’s where the AI comes in.

Not as a tool deployed by forward-looking executives eager to embrace the future, but as a last-ditch effort to extract the final bits of value from the pieces of something that’s already broken. Sports Illustrated has already slashed full-time staff, spun up a content mill with freelancers pumping out content for a fraction of the price, and let editorial standards sink into the gutter. The AI play is an arrow out of the same quiver.

It’s increasingly clear that to those in the content generation business — worth noting maybe that the original founders of Sports Illustrated would probably bristle at such a term — AI has become popular as a relatively cheap, wholly unimaginative way to attempt to generate value with the lowest amount of effort or investment.

To wit: This year has already seen a rash of AI scandals in the media world. The staffers of G/O Media, the publisher of popular sites including Gizmodo and the Onion, revolted after their publisher deployed generative AI to produce bland, error-ridden content. The once-venerable tech site CNET was caught — also by Futurism, incidentally — publishing AI-generated stories without disclosing them as such. BuzzFeed controversially announced that it would be using AI to generate posts like its trademark quizzes, and then disbanded its human-staffed News division.

Most recently, Gannett, the publisher of USA Today and many other newspapers, was accused of publishing AI-generated review content — curiously, it too blamed AdVon, the same company Sports Illustrated fingered in its statement on the matter.

All of these stories have one major thread in common — each of the media institutions in question had been facing economic challenges, and was run by an owner whose interest was not in producing a quality publication but gaming the algorithm to maximize profits while minimizing staff. As with SI, all were in dire straits before AI entered the equation.

G/O Media, formerly GMG Media, formerly Gawker Media, had been bankrupted by a malicious lawsuit funded by Silicon Valley titan Peter Thiel , repackaged and sold to Univision, then sold again to a private equity firm, Great Hill Partners. In a push to maximize revenues, Great Hill set about firing staffers, introducing spammy autoplay ads and asking staff to write more slideshows, which require readers to click more times than regular stories. In short, a nakedly profit-seeking agenda — one that came at the direct expense of both staff and readers — was in place long before the publisher started mucking around with AI.

When it finally did, notably publishing an article whose sole purpose was to list the “Star Wars” movies in order and yet got the order wrong — it caused an uproar.

Advertisement

Similarly, CNET has been hurting for years. Once a powerhouse of tech media, it was acquired by CBS for $1.8 billion in 2008, then was sold to a little-known private equity company based in South Carolina called Red Ventures. The Verge describes its business model as “straightforward and explicit: it publishes content designed to rank highly in Google search for ‘high-intent’ queries and then monetizes that traffic with lucrative affiliate links.” AI was used, it is believed, to streamline and maximize that process.

Both CNET and G/O are now owned by private equity firms, and much has been written about what a disaster it’s been for journalism to hand such companies the keys — one academic paper even quantified the damage . Which has been considerable.

As a journalist, all of this depresses me — I worked for Gizmodo for a bit, and was once an avid reader of Gawker, Deadspin and the AV Club, all of which have been gutted. BuzzFeed News won a Pulitzer and was widely loved. Sports Illustrated was a legend.

And look, things change. Cultural institutions evolve, fade, die out. Not every magazine needs to exist forever. But it is a bummer when an otherwise popular, viable, even beloved cultural institution is killed off — while there’s a team that’s working overtime at the helm that wants to keep the lights on — because a Wall Street firm or an adventuring licensing company can increase earnings at the margins by cutting out its heart.

The tragedy of AI is not that it stands to replace good journalists but that it takes every gross, callous move made by management to degrade the production of content — and promises to accelerate it.

If journalists are outraged at the rise of AI and its use in editorial operations and newsrooms, they should be outraged not because it’s a sign that they’re about to be replaced but because management has such little regard for the work being done by journalists that it’s willing to prioritize the automatic production of slop.

Advertisement

AI does not emerge from a media company’s innovation lab but from a handshake deal with a shady third-party company. It’s a hail Mary move that aspires to take the place of formulating a real plan to turn a business around — a future-shaped Get Out of Jail Free card for business leaders confronting bad times. And it’s almost certain to fail to deliver.. A day after news broke that Sports Illustrated has been publishing AI-generated articles passed off as the work of writers who did not exist, the staff of the storied sports magazine gathered for a virtual all-hands meeting. Staffers were furious, according to people who attended who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal company business.

The website Futurism reported Monday that SI, the glossy magazine that for decades was the gold standard for sports journalism, had produced consumer product reviews by artificial intelligence and bylined the stories by fake writers. One writer’s profile photo was available for purchase on an AI website, Futurism reported.

SI withdrew the stories, but its parent company, the Arena Group, a media conglomerate that also owns Men’s Journal and Parade, disputed Futurism’s report. In a statement Monday, Arena said the articles were written by people for AdVon Commerce, a third-party company it had hired to produce e-commerce content. Only the authors’ names and bios were AI-generated, Arena said.

Advertisement

By then, the jokes had already started. Pat McAfee devoted a segment to the story on his ESPN show. “Sports Illustrated’s like: ‘We can’t hire anybody. We don’t have the money,’ ” he said. “ ‘But what if we get 10 more writers? Think with me. Who are they? AI writers!’ ” Reporters said some of their sources jokingly asked whether the reporters were, in fact, real people.

On Tuesday, during a meeting that was described as “contentious” and “tense” by two who attended, staffers asked for a full, transparent accounting of what happened. The meeting was hosted by Editor in Chief Steve Cannella, and top executive Ross Levinsohn joined 40 minutes after it started, the people said.

The answers to questions Tuesday about the AI debacle, multiple staffers said, were unsatisfying and incomplete. Executives said that it was a one-time mistake with an AI company and that they had already broken off their relationship with AdVon before the Futurism story was published. But staffers thought higher-ups were ducking accountability in blaming AdVon, just as Levinsohn had done in an email sent to staffers Monday evening.

Advertisement

“The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external third-party company,” Levinsohn wrote. “AdVon assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans.”

Levinsohn and AdVon did not respond to requests for comment Tuesday.

Questions about AI are roiling journalism — how it will be wielded, the ethics behind it and what human work it might ultimately replace. At SI, the focus of staffers’ outrage was less existential — product reviews aren’t sports journalism — and more about yet another embarrassment that they said undermined their journalism.

Share this article Share

This, after all, is the same magazine at which a high school student was found to be covering the Cincinnati Bengals for SI’s network of affiliated sites, part of a strategy by the previous top executive at SI, James Heckman, to churn out content from cheaper writers — not to mention several rounds of layoffs and the SI-branded brain power pills that are trading on the magazine’s name.

Advertisement

That sort of brand-devaluation overshadows the good journalism the outlet still does, staffers believe, including a recent scoop about former Michigan football analyst Connor Stalions by Richard Johnson and Tom Verducci’s baseball coverage.

The root cause of the despair is a business model that staffers fear is irretrievably broken. The Arena Group pays $15 million per year for the rights to publish SI, in print and online, to a licensing company called Authentic Brands Group, which bought SI from its previous owner, magazine publisher Meredith. (More than 30 percent of the staff was laid off as part of that deal.)

Authentic Brands Group retained the commercial licensing rights to SI, which it uses for things such as the newly launched Sports Illustrated resorts. Arena Group, meanwhile, starts every year $15 million in the hole with its SI budget and must generate most of its revenue from subscriptions and advertising, according to people familiar with the deal. Even documentary, audio and scripted TV licensing rights are controlled by Authentic Brands Group.

Advertisement

That might explain the need for more content, however it’s generated.

Staffers also have chafed at new article production goals, though they vary by writer. Still, multiple staffers called them draconian and said they don’t properly distinguish between a daily story and a deeply reported investigation. (“It’s like judging a baseball player by how many times he swings,” one reporter said.)

Earlier this year, Levinsohn told staffers that the Arena Group owed tens of millions of dollars in a debt payment that was coming due, which staffers worried could threaten the magazine’s viability, two staffers said. That catastrophe was averted with a new investment from 5-Hour Energy founder Manoj Bhargava, according to those staffers.

This isn’t the first time a media company has run into trouble over allegedly AI-generated reviews from AdVon. In October, staffers at USA Today’s e-commerce site noticed reviews that appeared to be AI-generated and published under fake bylines appearing on their site.

Advertisement

Like Sports Illustrated, USA Today owner Gannett claimed the posts weren’t generated by AI. Instead, a spokeswoman insisted the fake names were pseudonyms for people who wrote the articles through a contract with AdVon.. Sports Illustrated publisher The Arena Group fired its CEO — just weeks after the publication triggered a firestorm for using artificial intelligence to produce poorly-written product reviews written by fake authors.

Ross Levinsohn, who served as The Arena Group’s chief since 2020, was terminated by the company’s board of directors on Monday, effective immediately, the publisher said in a press release.

Manoj Bhargava, the founder of the caffeine brand 5-Hour Energy and a majority investor in The Arena Group, will be joining the company as chairman interim CEO, announced The Arena Group, which also owns Men’s Journal and TheStreet.

Vince Bodiford, a representative for Bhargava, insisted to The Post that Levinsohn’s ousting had nothing to do with Sports Illustrated’s AI nightmare late last month, but rather part of a larger effort by The Arena Group’s board of directors “to improve the operational efficiency and the revenue of the company.”

“That included significant changes with the leadership team,” Bodiford added, noting that three other C-suite executives were fired last week — chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

4 Ross Levinsohn was fired his position as Arena Group CEO on Monday, effective immediately, the publisher said in a press release on Monday. The Arena Group owns Sports Illustrated, Men’s Journal and TheStreet, among other outlets. Getty Images for Prime Video

4 Manoj Bhargava, the founder of the caffeine brand 5-Hour Energy and a majority investor in The Arena Group, will be joining the company as chairman interim CEO, the publisher said. Str/EPA/Shutterstock

Levinsohn addressed the executive shakeup in a LinkedIn post also shared Monday, which failed to touch on the company’s recent troubles and instead touted his time with The Arena Group as “an incredible ride.”

The timing of Levinsohn’s firing did, however, raise eyebrows, especially considering SI’s high-profile mishap late last month, when news site Futurism outed SI for posting AI-generated stories under bylines from made-up reporters whose photos could be found on a website used to buy AI-generated headshots.

After being contacted about the deceptive practice, the articles disappeared from SI’s site, the outlet reported.

A digital archive database, however, still shows that one story penned by a made-up man with the name Drew Ortiz ranked “the best full-size volleyballs.”

“Volleyball can be a little tricky to get into, especially without an actual ball to practice with,” read the article, which The Arena Group as since said were supplied by a third-party provider, AdVon Commerce.

Bodiford told The Post that The Arena Group is “taking steps to ensure that” SI has, in fact, scrubbed its landing pages of AI-generated content.

“We are very, very tuned into the importance of this issue,” Bhargava’s spokesman added.

Aside from hurting SI’s reputation, the AI debacle drew a lot of scrutiny from the outlet’s own staffers, who described Futurism’s report of the deceptive practices as “horrifying.”

4 SI’s executive shakeup comes just weeks after news site Futurism revealed it had posted AI-generated stories under bylines from made-up reporters, including Drew Ortiz.

4 One AI-generated story penned by Ortiz — a made-up man whose photo could be found on a website used to buy AI headshots — ranked volleyballs.

“Along with basic principles of honesty, trust, journalistic ethics, etc. — I take seriously the weight of a Sports Illustrated byline. It meant something to me long before I ever dreamed of working here,” SI staff writer Emma Baccellieri, wrote on X in the wake of the news breaking. “This report was horrifying to read.”

“The practices described in the story published today do real damage to the credibility of the hardworking humans I have been honored to work with for the past 9 years,” Mitch Goldich, a fellow writer and editor at the magazine, also posted to X.

Bhargava, meanwhile, has already positioned himself as a sharp-elbowed, outspoken boss, making headlines earlier this month when he told Arena Group staffers at a town hall meeting: “No one is important. I am not important. … The amount of useless stuff you guys do is staggering.”

In a list of highlights from the 90-minute meeting, people in attendance told Front Office Sports that Bhargava ranted about recycling being “useless,” declared “PowerPoints are illegal” because such presentations are a waste of time and demanded that workers “stop doing dumb stuff.”. Ross Levinsohn, the CEO of the publisher of Sports Illustrated, is out of a job, weeks after the venerable brand came under fire after accusations it had been publishing articles written by AI.

Arena Group Holdings, which includes the magazine in its portfolio, announced the cut late Monday, saying it was made “to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company.” The AI incident was not mentioned in the terse release.

(Arena holds a multi-year publishing agreement for the magazine. Authentic Brands Group bought Sports Illustrated for $110 million in 2019.)

Manoj Bhargava, founder of 5-Hour Energy, was named interim CEO of Arena Group. Bhargava owns a majority stake in Arena.

The executive shuffle at the Sports Illustrated publisher is just the latest in a series of high-profile cuts at Arena Group. Less than a week ago, the company fired three executives—operations president and chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

Sports Illustrated saw its reputation take a hit when reports of the allegedly AI-written stories became public last month. The company denied the stories themselves were written by AI, but fired the company that had produced them and manufactured the bylines of authors who seemingly did not exist.

The union representing editorial staff at the magazine said that it was “horrified” by the report.

The Futurism website, which broke the story, quoted an unnamed person at the magazine who said artificial intelligence was used in the creation of some content as well—“no matter how much they say that it’s not.”

Levinsohn had served as CEO of Arena since 2020. Prior to that, he was a top executive at Yahoo, Tribune Publishing, and Fox Interactive.

“After 4 1/2 years, today is my last day at The Arena Group,” Levinsohn wrote on LinkedIn. “Following our majority sale announced last month, the company is positioned well for the future. It has been an incredible ride… Excited for what the future will bring and so grateful for the experience of running and building a public company with such success.”

Correction, Dec. 12, 2023: A previous version of this article misstated The Arena Group’s relationship to Sports Illustrated.. Photo by Steve Johnson on Unsplash

December 12, 2023

Sports Illustrated has fired its CEO, Ross Levinsohn, after being accused of producing AI-generated content. This firing came on the heels of Futurism reporting that the publication used the content as part of its website. Levinsohn has been CEO of The Arena Group since 2020. Before that, he was an executive at Yahoo, Fox Interactive, and Tribune Publishing.

Levinsohn’s ousting came after Futurism alleged that several Sports Illustrated bylines did not have humans attached to their writings. The site cited one instance of a writer named Drew Ortiz, who didn’t exist. The author reportedly had no social media presence and no publishing history. The story also noted that his profile photo for the publication was listed as for sale on a website that sells AI-generated headshots. It has yet to be clarified whether Levinsohn’s firing was related to the shakeup.

The Arena Group, which acquired Sports Illustrated in 2019, denied the allegations and said the articles were sourced commercial content from a third-party advertising company, AdVon Commerce. A spokesperson for The Arena Group wrote, “Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate.”

Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate.



The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon… — Sports Illustrated (@SInow) November 27, 2023

The statement claimed the articles in question were product reviews. Subsequently, The Arena Group claimed they were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce.

The Guardian reported that Levinsohn once indicated Sports Illustrated would incorporate AI into its journalism. However, he also explained it would never replace journalists. “While AI will never replace journalism, reporting, or crafting and editing a story, rapidly improving AI technologies can create enterprise value for our brands and partners,” Levinsohn said in February.

His firing came after the company terminated operations president, COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster. Effective this week, Manoj Bhargava will serve as Sports Illustrated’s interim chief executive officer. The 5-Hour Energy founder owns a majority stake in The Arena Group.. Ross Levinsohn has been fired as CEO of Sports Illustrated and publishers The Arena Group, weeks after Futurism reported that SI had been running stories generated by artificial intelligence , using bogus names and AI-generated byline pictures. Levinsohn, the magazine's CEO since 2019, is the latest exec to go in what CNN describes as a "C-suite bloodbath" at The Arena Group. Chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster were fired last week.

The company said Levinsohn was fired to improve its "operational efficiency and revenue." His replacement is Manoj Bhargava, founder of the company that makes the 5-Hour Energy drink. A Bhargava spokesperson tells the BBC that Levinsohn's firing is part of efforts to improve the company and "had absolutely nothing to do with the AI issue at all." After layoffs at SI earlier this year, Levinsohn said that while artificial intelligence won't replace journalism, "rapidly improving AI technologies can create enterprise value for our brands and partners."

After the report on allegedly AI-generated stories last month, Arena said the content in question was e-commerce articles from advertising company, AdVon Commerce, the Guardian reports. Arena said it had been assured the content was written by humans, but the stories were removed after they "learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy—actions we strongly condemn." (More Sports Illustrated stories.). There used to be a time when newspaper journalists had to scroll through countless microfiche reels and dig through clips to find old articles for background material for their stories.

Electronic archives, along with the internet, have made our lives easier and restructured the way we disseminate the news and how audiences consume it.

That’s how it should work. Technology should help media workers do their jobs, not impersonate them or actually carry out the tasks of a real human hired to dig for facts.

This brings us to artificial intelligence, or AI, which has crept into some newsrooms. Most media companies have issued strict guidelines prohibiting the tool from being used for publishable content and images. The few that have — unfortunately, in our view — gone a step further by using AI to pen copy at least clearly mark those write-ups as having been produced by a non-human.

No such disclaimers were in sight when Sports Illustrated fumbled the ball with AI. Once considered a media behemoth in the athletic world, SI recently featured product reviews on its website — with the bylines of reporters who don’t exist.

Talk about foul play, for readers and for journalism as a profession.

Editorial Editorial

The accompanying articles were also “AI-generated,” a staffer told Futurism, a news website dedicated to science and technology.

Sports Illustrated, which is mostly online and churns out a print magazine once a month, maintained the features were written by living, breathing mortals.

AdVon Commerce, the external, third-party company hired for the licensed content, had its employees “use a pen or pseudo name” to protect their privacy, a spokesperson for the magazine’s publisher, The Arena Group, explained in a statement. Which, if true, would be especially galling, given that journalists put their real bylines and names out there for public consumption every day. It’s part of the job.

Missing in the statement was the reasoning behind the use of AI-generated headshots, advertised online as a “neutral white young-adult male” and “joyful Asian young-adult female.”

Even if the stories, and whoever or whatever wrote them, didn’t give false information, there is no question Drew Ortiz, the “neutral white guy,” and Sora Tanaka, the “joyful Asian,” aren’t real people. Their attached “biographies” also reeked of hardcore phoniness.

When you “create somebody from the ether,” you don’t have to pay them, as the Sun-Times’ Rick Telander pointed out last week in his column about the controversy.

Using names like Ortiz — even though it was assigned to a Caucasian bot — and Tanaka also gives the false illusion of diversity, allowing readers to believe Sports Illustrated is serious about hiring people of color.

The smiling faces of these fictional scribes have since been scrubbed off SI’s website and The Arena Group has severed ties with AdVon, as well as two of the publisher’s senior executives.

No ceding ground to AI

Newsrooms will always have to adapt to certain trends or risk extinction. The essence of what a journalist does, however, will never change. That torch can never be handed over to AI. Whether it’s asking tough questions or the basic 5Ws — who, what, where, when and why — no technology will be as adept or qualified at the job as a newswoman or newsman.

AI knows it, too. “AI should not be used in journalism,” opined an experimental St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial created by Microsoft’s Bing Chat AI program over the fall.

“... it can undermine the credibility and trustworthiness of news. AI can generate fake news, manipulate facts, and spread misinformation.”

That’s the truth.

Gannett over the summer “paused” using LedeAI for some of its high school sports coverage for “errors, unwanted repetition and/or awkward phrasing” that LedeAI CEO Jay Allred admitted to.

We at the Sun-Times Editorial Board concede reporters aren’t perfect. They can make mistakes, too, and when those happen, corrections are issued immediately in print and online.

Bad apples, like Fox Sports reporter Charissa Thompson, also exist, scarring the reputation of countless hard-working sports journalists who don’t fabricate quotes as Thompson copped to doing in her NFL sideline reports. Such behavior is especially egregious when most journalists champion ethics and accuracy, yet are constantly accused of spreading misinformation by politicians and some members of the public.

Throwing AI into the mix will only embolden those who want legitimate media institutions to crumble, which in turn erodes an essential institution of democracy.

When AI spits out inaccuracies, it’s referred to as a “hallucination.”

Most reporters aren’t seeing things when they scribble down notes or type on their laptop.

Newsroom leaders dabbling with AI shouldn’t lose sight of its limitations. It’s delusional to think tech can ever replace real journalists.

The Sun-Times welcomes letters to the editor and op-eds. See our guidelines.

. Late last month, we reported that venerable magazine Sports Illustrated had been publishing commerce articles bylined by nonexistent writers with AI-generated profile pictures.

The revelation sparked a storm of media coverage and outrage from the magazine's staff. The week after our story ran, Sports Illustrated publisher The Arena Group sacked two top executives, claiming the departures had nothing to do with the AI story.

And yet. There's now been another major shakeup, with The Arena Group announcing Monday afternoon that its board of directors has terminated the employment of its CEO, Ross Levinsohn.

"Effective immediately, Ross Levinsohn will be leaving the company and his role as CEO," wrote Grady Tripp, the company's senior vice president of people, in an email to staff. "This follows the recent departure of three senior executives last week." A press release also went out to business news wires — discrete with this news, they are not.

Manoj Bharga, the founder of the energy drink brand 5-hour Energy and majority investor of The Arena Group, will be joining as a temporary CEO. During a meeting about the termination of the execs last week, Bharga made headlines for lecturing staff to "stop doing dumb stuff" and saying the "amount of useless stuff you guys do is staggering." He also outlawed Powerpoint presentations.

After our initial story, The Arena Group issued a statement explaining that the articles with the AI-generated headshots had been provided by a contractor called AdVon Commerce. It also deleted all the articles by fake authors, yet disputed the claim by one of our sources that the articles themselves had been AI-generated as well as the headshots.

Neither Tripp's email nor a press release mentioned the AI scandal. An Arena Group representative declined to say whether the firing had anything to do with the AI story, saying in an email that the company had "nothing further to add to the company's prior statements regarding AI or terminations."

Levinsohn has a long history in media C-suites, but is perhaps best known in media circles for taking a leave of absence from Tronc when it emerged that he had settled several sexual harassment suits at previous employers. He was eventually cleared and returned to the workplace.

"We understand that change can be challenging, but it is also a necessary catalyst for progress," Tripp wrote. "Our commitment to making Arena a successful and profitable company remains steadfast. We believe that these and other changes will contribute to the growth and success of Arena for the benefit of all stakeholders, including our valued customers, shareholders, and employees."

Disclosure: Futurism's parent company, Recurrent Ventures, previously worked with AdVon in 2022 via its partnership to distribute select content on third-party e-commerce platforms. This content was written by Recurrent’s contributors. Presently, Recurrent maintains a business relationship with them to test Commerce content internationally for select brands (of which Futurism is not one). AdVon content has never been published on Futurism or any of Recurrent's websites.

More on Sports Illustrated: People Are Absolutely Roasting Sports Illustrated's Ridiculous Excuse for Its AI-Generated Writers. Yesterday, we reported that Sports Illustrated had been publishing articles by fake writers with AI-generated profile pictures.

Worse, one source alleged, at least some of the posts themselves were AI-generated as well.

"The content is absolutely AI-generated," they said, "no matter how much they say that it's not."

In response, Sports Illustrated's publisher The Arena Group issued a wordy statement. Let's just paste it here:

Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate.

The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce. A number of AdVon’s e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised.

AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans. According to AdVon, their writers, editors, and researchers create and curate content and follow a policy that involves using both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software on all content. However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy – actions we strongly condemn – and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.

As far as we can tell, they're basically blaming a contractor called AdVon for the fake writers, and saying that they conducted an "investigation" in which they asked the contractor whether the posts were AI-generated and were told that they were not.

Not quite convinced by that dubious denial? Neither are we — and neither were people online, who have been absolutely dunking on the tepid response.

No Laying Up editorial director Kevin Van Valkenburg, for instance, zoomed in on the eyebrow-raising claim that the fake writers named in our story would need to use pseudonyms to publish milquetoast articles about sporting equipment.

"The idea that 'Sora Tanaka' and 'Ben Ortiz' were just nome de plumes for real writers who wanted to publish important journalism like 'How to get into volleyball' but felt they needed to remain anonymous is too stupid to even contemplate," he quipped.

And ESPN director Matt Ufford, for instance, called the statement "pathetic" and "an insult to anyone who has ever worked for Sports Illustrated."

Writer Victoria Zeller was even more blunt, blasting the statement as a "blatant ridiculous lie."

Others took issue with the ridiculous claim that the contractor would have cooked up phony writers, outfitted them with fake biographies and AI-generated headshots, and then published only non-AI content under their bylines.

"While our vendor completely bamboozled us with their fake reporters with AI-generated profile pics, we believe them when they say their articles were not AI-generated," wrote data journalist Dan Nguyen in another searing post.

By carefully zooming in on just one aspect of our reporting, The Arena Group didn't just dodge the main allegations of our story. It also avoided grappling with impactful criticisms, like the fact that it pointedly attached AI-generated images of fictional Asian and Black to its fake bylines, creating astroturf diversity in an industry that is anything but diverse.

Others called out SI's management for its cowardice in turning off the replies on the posted PR-approved statement.

"HAL 9000 turned off replies to its tweet insisting it only wants what's best for you," another reader joked Many readers fixated on the fact that the statement had no byline, speculating — facetiously, but maybe with a grain of truth given the overall wildness of the story — that the statement itself might have been generated by AI.

By "releasing this statement from an unnamed spokesperson, they are never beating the AI accusations," another observer wrote

"Thank you for that human emotion filled explanation, fellow robot," wrote blogger Roy L. Pickering Jr.

Bottom line? By latching onto AI-generated content and failing to provide real transparency when they were caught, The Arena Group has tarnished a storied magazine that was once seen as the crème de la crème of sports journalism.

Disclosure: Futurism's parent company, Recurrent Ventures, previously worked with AdVon in 2022 via its partnership to distribute select content on third-party e-commerce platforms. This content was written by Recurrent’s contributors. Presently, Recurrent maintains a business relationship with them to test Commerce content internationally for select brands (of which Futurism is not one). AdVon content has never been published on Futurism or any of Recurrent’s websites.

More on Sports Illustrated: Sports Illustrated Published Articles by Fake, AI-Generated Writers. . Sports Illustrated used to publish essays by Kurt Vonnegut and Frank Deford. Now it publishes uncannily bland drivel by AI-generated personas, a fact revealed by Futurism in an exposé. Moreover, its response to the article implies that it has outsourced editorial to a content farm and it has no direct knowledge of who or what wrote it.

The AI authors' writing often sounds like it was written by an alien; one Ortiz article, for instance, warns that volleyball "can be a little tricky to get into, especially without an actual ball to practice with." According to a second person involved in the creation of the Sports Illustrated content who also asked to be kept anonymous, that's because it's not just the authors' headshots that are AI-generated. At least some of the articles themselves, they said, were churned out using AI as well. "The content is absolutely AI-generated," the second source said, "no matter how much they say that it's not."

The problem is that this works: writing for machines, not humans, is where it's at. On Twitter, one "Jake Ward"—seemingly human, but who knows?—is getting a lot of attention for his thread (complete with instructions!) on how he executed an "SEO heist" on another site by researching its search profile and flooding the web with AI-generated clones of its articles, to massive success.

The pressing question: why are advertisers paying to appear against this material? The answer, simply put, is that Google is sending people to look at it. If you want to be read by a human, forst you must write for the machine.. Last month, Sports Illustrated removed various articles after the authors were exposed as AI-generated personas and whose text was seemingly AI-generated itself—it was hard to be certain, because the material turned out to be sourced to a content farm whose excuses and assertions Sports Illustrated could only weakly repeat. And now it has removed those responsible for the mess, including the company's CEO.

A spokesperson for The Arena Group declined to go into further detail to explain the ouster of Ross Levinsohn, who served as chief executive for three years. But the move came after an embarrassing debacle in which Sports Illustrated was caught publishing stories with fake author names and profile photos generated by artificial intelligence. Levinsohn was replaced, effective immediately, by interim chief executive Manoj Bhargava, the 5-Hour Energy founder who owns a majority stake in The Arena Group, said Vince Bodiford, a spokesperson for Bhargava. … "All of the media brands, including Sports Illustrated, will continue to operate with the management of those verticals, while the company just takes a broad view of operations and how to improve the business overall," Bodiford told CNN.

Glad to see the founder of 5-Hour Energy will be keeping a close eye henceforth on this media brand / vertical. The sportswriting legacy of Kurt Vonnegut, Frank Deford and Dan Jenkins is in safe hands.. The owners of Sports Illustrated have fired CEO Ross Levinsohn after the outlet was accused of publishing AI-generated writing while using headshots of fake authors and creating bogus profiles.

The Arena Group Holdings, which owns the 79-year-old periodical, made the announcement after a board of directors meeting 'to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company.'

Levinsohn, 59, had served as CEO and publisher of SI since 2019 and has run The Arena Group since 2020.

He will be replaced in the interim by Manoj Bhargava, the founder and CEO of Innovations Ventures LLC, best known for 5-Hour Energy Drink.

Bhargava, who bought a majority stake in the company in August, also owns a group of television stations.

The owners of Sports Illustrated have fired CEO Ross Levinsohn after it was accused of publishing AI-generated writing while using headshots of fake authors and creating bogus profiles

An investigation conducted by Futurism found multiple 'authors' with biography pages on the Sports Illustrated website were fake - including made-up interests, hobbies and even an AI-created headshot

One of the alleged writers' headshots is seen on a website selling AI-generated photos

In addition to Levinsohn, COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster have also been terminated.

However, a spokesperson for Bhargava claims the house cleaning was all in the cards ahead of the scandal breaking.

'That included significant changes with the leadership team,' Vince Bodiford told the New York Post, changes that they hope will 'improve the operational efficiency and the revenue of the company.'

Levinsohn called the company 'positioned well for the future' in a LinkedIn post announcing his departure.

'It has been an incredible ride. We've been able to grow the business substantially from 10s of millions of users to more than 100 million and 10s of millions of revenue to hundreds of millions. We've grown in every key category and added brands like SI, The Street, Parade, Men's Journal, Powder and Surfer to our platform to help create a major digital player.'

He made no mention of the controversy, saying that he's 'most proud' of the team he built.

The legacy magazine was called out for the content - which was allegedly written by nonexistent authors. Sports Illustrated said that the work came from a 'third party' who assured their articles were written by humans.

An investigation conducted by news outlet Futurism found that multiple 'authors' with biography pages on the Sports Illustrated website were fake - including made-up interests, hobbies and even an AI-created headshot.

Levinsohn will be replaced in the interim by Manoj Bhargava, the founder and CEO of Innovations Ventures LLC, best known for 5-Hour Energy Drink

Levinsohn, 59, had served as CEO and publisher of SI since 2019 and has urn The Arena Group since 2020

As well as the authors, some of the writing on the website's review page was accused of sounding like it was written by an 'alien' - with bizarre descriptions and formatting discrepancies.

After the magazine's publisher, The Arena Group, was first contacted about the allegations, all of the bizarre content disappeared, according to the report.

Drew Ortiz, an alleged writer, had a profile that highlighted how he 'has spent much of his life outdoors, and is excited to guide you through his never-ending list of the best products to keep you from falling to the perils of nature.

'Nowadays, there is rarely a weekend that goes by where Drew isn't out camping, hiking, or just back on his parents' farm.'

The report alleges Ortiz doesn't exist - having no social media presence or publishing history.

His profile photo was found on a website that sells AI-generated headshots. Ortiz's fake image is described as 'neutral white young-adult male with short brown hair and blue eyes.'

Months ago, Ortiz's page disappeared completely - and started redirecting to a page for someone named Sora Tanaka. Her image was also on sale on an AI website, listed as 'joyful Asian young-adult female with long brown hair and brown eyes.'

The legacy magazine was called out for the content - which was allegedly written by nonexistent authors. Sports Illustrated said the work came from a 'third party,' who assured their articles were written by humans

Her alleged fake description on the Sports Illustrated website read: 'Sora has always been a fitness guru, and loves to try different foods and drinks. Ms. Tanaka is thrilled to bring her fitness and nutritional expertise to the Product Reviews Team, and promises to bring you nothing but the best of the best.'

A third, allegedly fake, writer for Sports Illustrated is Domino Abrams - whose biography said he was a stay-at-home dad. His headshot was also found to be AI-generated.

The report also claimed that their bylines would change over too - with no editor's note giving an explanation as to why someone's story was suddenly attributed to someone else.

At the end of the stories, it was stated that the work was 'created by a 3rd party,' and the 'Sports Illustrated editorial staff are not involved in the creation of this content.'

One insider told Futurism: 'There's a lot. I was like, what are they? This is ridiculous. This person does not exist.

'At the bottom [of the page] there would be a photo of a person and some fake description of them like, 'oh, John lives in Houston, Texas. He loves yard games and hanging out with his dog, Sam.' Stuff like that. It's just crazy.'

Another source told the outlet: 'The content is absolutely AI-generated, no matter how much they say that it's not.'

The Arena Group had a partnership with AdVon Commerce, the company that supplied the posts. But the publisher said it has since severed ties with the firm.

Months ago, Ortiz's page disappeared completely - and started redirecting to the page related to someone named Sora Tanaka. Her image was also on sale, listed as 'joyful Asian young-adult female with long brown hair and brown eyes'

Sora Tanaka's headshot is seen on an AI website

In a statement to Variety, an Arena Group spokesperson said: 'The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce.

'A number of AdVon's e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised.

'AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans.

'According to AdVon, their writers, editors and researchers create and curate content and follow a policy that involves using both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software on all content.

'However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we don't condone — and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.'. 'Sports Illustrated' is accused of posting articles by writers created by AI

A new report exposes stories by writers who don't seem to exist, with bio photos that are stock images, at the revered sports magazine.

MARY LOUISE KELLY, HOST:

This next story is about what happened when AI met SI. Sports Illustrated and its parent company have been rocked by accusations that it has posted articles by authors who do not exist. These writers were created by artificial intelligence - that is, computers. According to the news site Futurism, several journalists at SI say some articles were written by computers, too. NPR media correspondent David Folkenflik is with me. Hey, David.

DAVID FOLKENFLIK, BYLINE: Hey, Mary Louise.

KELLY: So this is bananas, this story.

FOLKENFLIK: Bananas.

KELLY: Just walk us through the allegations.

FOLKENFLIK: Well, all credit to Futurism here. They did a piece based on both talking to folks inside Sports Illustrated, unnamed journalists there, and also their own analyses, finding out that, in fact - that there are authors that are fake. There's, for example, a guy named Drew Ortiz who apparently wrote a piece about what was the best volleyball to buy - turns out Drew Ortiz doesn't exist, turns out Futurism was able to find that his photograph was on a database of AI-created images meant to look like photographs of real people and that some unnamed journalists at SI say some of the articles themselves were fake. And obviously...

KELLY: These are real journalists at SI, we should note - real, actual people. OK.

FOLKENFLIK: Yeah, right, real ones - the idea being the fake authors were meant to give the AI-created post credibility. So, again, to underscore both that some articles were generated by AI and that the notional authors were created by AI as well - what a humbling thing this is for Sports Illustrated. It was one of the first publications I ever subscribed to in the '70s. It set the standards for sports journalism for decades. And it was really known - what? - for its writing, the heart of its journalists - people like Frank Deford and Sally Jenkins.

KELLY: Yeah. So what is Sports Illustrated saying?

FOLKENFLIK: Well, Sports Illustrated and its parent company, Arena, says the most serious claim isn't true - that no content was generated by artificial intelligence, that their outside contractor, called AdVon, gave assurances all the articles were written and edited by people but that some of their writers used a pen- or pseudo-name - this is the phrasing of Sports Illustrated - in certain articles to protect author privacy. Sports Illustrated's parent company said it also essentially severed that contract with the outside group. I might add that the full statement that was released read a little bit as though it had been generated by artificial intelligence itself. It didn't answer a whole host of questions.

KELLY: Yeah. And I will note I was going back and reading some of the articles in question, and they make no sense. Some of them really do not sound like they're written by a human being.

FOLKENFLIK: This guy Drew Ortiz wrote this piece. He claimed, you know, it's hard to practice volleyball without a volleyball. These are insights that don't need to be shared with the broader public.

KELLY: How unusual would it be if a publication like, as you say, the storied Sports Illustrated - if it were relying on artificial intelligence to this degree?

FOLKENFLIK: Right. So a lot of news organizations are deploying artificial intelligence in scouring databases and figuring out how to add, you know, to its journalistic output. But we've seen scandals like this erupt over the past year. Futurism had early this year revealed that CNET, which covers, you know, digital media, had been relying on seemingly artificial intelligence in developing and posting articles. It pulled those back. Similarly, Gannett, which owns hundreds of publications around the country, using the same outside vendor Sports Illustrated, had posted articles that were then disavowed as well after this was revealed to be the case that AI was involved. And I want to also add this outside vendor didn't reply to my request for comment for our conversation.

KELLY: I fear I know the answer to this last question, David, but what might a revelation like this do for trust in the media writ large?

FOLKENFLIK: Well, serious news organizations, including NPR, right now are issuing sort of holding policies, advisories to their newsroom saying, look. This is going to be a tool. We want to figure out how to use it but use it ethically and to enhance our journalism, not to replace it. What you're seeing are journalists inside places like Sports Illustrated objects strongly to the use of this both because they're worried it could displace jobs, but also, it's displacing the credibility of what they do and treating their audiences simply as consumers and not as citizens interested in a larger world.

KELLY: That is NPR media correspondent, a real person, David Folkenflik. Thank you, David.

FOLKENFLIK: You bet.

(SOUNDBITE OF ALLAH-LAS' "RASPBERRY JAM")

Copyright © 2023 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by an NPR contractor. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.. The owner of the venerated sports magazine “Sports Illustrated” fired its CEO following a scandal which revealed the magazine had allegedly been publishing articles written by artificially generated writers, according to a press release from parent company The Arena Group.

Sports Illustrated publisher fires CEO in latest round of exec terminations following AI scandal https://t.co/KLkvkaiNFe — NBC News (@NBCNews) December 12, 2023



The company’s board announced Monday afternoon they had “terminated the employment of CEO Ross Levinsohn, and named Manoj Bhargava as interim Chief Executive Officer, both effective today.”

Levinsohn’s departure follows the company’s previous dismissals of COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster, per the statement.

Sports Illustrated has been under fire since the bombshell November report from Futurism that alleges the company created fake author pages to pump out artificial intelligence-generated content. (RELATED: The Senate Is Considering An AI Bill That Could Radically Alter The Future Of The Internet)

One of the site’s authors, Drew Ortiz, had a profile picture that appeared to be taken from a website that generates artificial photos, per Futurism. This was reportedly not the only profile with a picture which appeared to be from the website. When Ortiz’ page was taken down this summer, it linked to a certain Sora Tanaka, which was in turn replaced by another profile page, the outlet reported. When Futurism reached out to Sports Illustrated, the magazine apparently deleted all of the other allegedly AI-generated pages from their site.

One article, apparently written by Ortiz, describes volleyball as a sport that “can be a little tricky to get into, especially without an actual ball to practice with,” according to Futurism.

The Arena Group has since admitted the content came from a third party, AdVon Commerce, according to the New York Post.

Newly minted CEO Manoj Bhargava’s representative Vince Bodiford claimed the C-suite shakeup was unrelated to the AI incident, and instead partially a move by the board of directors of The Arena Group “to improve the operational efficiency and the revenue of the company,” the outlet reported.. One week after Sports Illustrated suffered an embarrassing artificial intelligence scandal, the latest leader of the company that operates SI laid down the law for his new employees.

Manoj Bhargava, the 5-Hour Energy drink owner whose firm earlier this year purchased a controlling stake in The Arena Group, which operates Sports Illustrated, introduced himself in a meandering video call with Arena staff on Wednesday afternoon.

That call was preceded by a shakeup atop SI and The Arena Group: Out are Arena COO Andrew Kraft and president of media Rob Barrett. With the call, Bhargava asserted his control of the publication and other outlets under the Arena banner, sources told Front Office Sports.

“No one is important,” Bhargava told staffers, per one source on hand for the presentation. “I am not important. … The amount of useless stuff you guys do is staggering.”

The meeting lasted more than 90 minutes, and Bhargava joked at one point, “Did anyone bring any 5-Hour [Energy drink]?”

Other highlights from Bhargava’s comments during the town hall:

A rant about recycling being “useless.”

He told employees they should “stop doing dumb stuff.”

He declared “PowerPoints are illegal” because such presentations are a waste of time.

TAG told Front Office Sports in a statement: “Today, Manoj conducted a virtual town hall and spoke with the staff of The Arena Group, and took questions. Also today, some adjustments to the business have been made to improve efficiency and revenue, and also some changes to senior management have been made.”

TAG Senior VP of growth Matthew Lombardi is expected to have an expanded role in the new structure, sources told FOS. Lombardi’s sports news aggregator website, The Spun, was acquired by TAG in 2021.

Katie Kulik, who was tapped as TAG’s chief revenue officer last month, will lead the business side of SI, the sources said.

SI and TAG are still dealing with the fallout from a bombshell report last week by Futurism that alleged the venerable journalism outfit had used artificial intelligence to create product reviews and had fabricated bylines and headshots.

Bhargava agreed to acquire a majority stake in TAG in August, when his Simplify Inventions took a roughly 65% stake in the company. In return, TAG got a $50 million investment and a five-year, $60 million advertising commitment from a collection of consumer brands owned by Simplify.

“Like most in the media world, the greater reach you have, the more opportunity you have,” TAG chief executive Ross Levinsohn said at the time about the deal. “This dramatically accelerates our path to being a diversified media company featuring great brands.”

Meanwhile, SI has had to weather a blizzard of negative headlines about its alleged use of AI. TAG placed the blame on a third party company called AdVon Commerce, saying through a spokesperson:

“AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans. However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we don’t condone — and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.”

Bhargava did not address the allegations in the Futurism story during the town hall, one source told FOS. Moreover, another source told FOS that the timing of the Futurism story, and the departure of the the Arena execs were unrelated.

The Sports Illustrated Union, representing the outlet’s writers, released a statement last week saying its members were “horrified” by the report and demanded “answers and transparency” from the parent company.

“If true, these practices violate everything we believe in about journalism,” the union said. “We deplore being associated with something so disrespectful to our readers.”

SI, in its 69th year, has struggled to transition from print to digital, suffering through numerous rounds of restructurings and cutbacks, including in February when TAG laid off 17 employees.

In 2019, Authentic purchased SI and then leased out its publishing rights to TAG — known as Maven — soon after the transaction.. News by Jeroslyn JoVonn Sports Illustrated CEO Fired After AI-Generated Stories Scandal The chief executive officer of "Sports Illustrated" has been ousted after the site was caught publishing AI-generated stories with fake author names and profiles.









The chief executive officer of Sports Illustrated has been ousted after the site was caught publishing AI-generated stories.

On Monday, Dec. 11 The Arena Group, which operates Sports Illustrated and The Street, fired its chief executive Ross Levinsohn after Sports Illustrated was caught publishing stories with fake author names and profile photos generated by artificial intelligence, CNN reports.

Levinsohn, who served as CEO for three years, was replaced by interim chief executive Manoj Bhargava, the founder of the energy drink brand 5-Hour Energy and majority investor of The Arena Group.

His removal comes less than a week after The Arena Group fired three major executives: operations president and chief operating officer Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

“All of the media brands, including Sports Illustrated, will continue to operate with the management of those verticals, while the company just takes a broad view of operations and how to improve the business overall,” Vince Bodiford, a spokesperson for Bhargava said

When asked if the AI-generated articles had anything to do with the swift terminations, Bodiford said, “We have nothing further to add to the company’s prior statements regarding A.I.”

Futurism first revealed the AI purported author “Sora Tanaka,” which/who claimed to be a product reviewer on the site.

“Sora has always been a fitness guru, and loves to try different foods and drinks,” the profile stated. “Ms. Tanaka is thrilled to bring her fitness and nutritional expertise to the Product Reviews Team, and promises to bring you nothing but the best of the best.”

When called out, The Arena Group issued a statement claiming the articles with the AI-generated headshots had been provided by a contractor called AdVon Commerce.

“We understand that change can be challenging, but it is also a necessary catalyst for progress,” Grady Tripp, the company’s senior vice president of people wrote. “Our commitment to making Arena a successful and profitable company remains steadfast. We believe that these and other changes will contribute to the growth and success of Arena for the benefit of all stakeholders, including our valued customers, shareholders, and employees.”

RELATED CONTENT: Sports Illustrated Published Articles Written By Fake, AI-Generated Writers. The publisher of Sport Illustrated and The Street, Arena Group, fired CEO Ross Levinsohn after ongoing fallout over its use of artificial intelligence on the site.

“Today, the board of directors of The Arena Group Holdings, Inc. (NYSE American: AREN) met and took actions to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company,” a statement from the publisher read. “The board terminated the employment of CEO Ross Levinsohn, and named Manoj Bhargava as interim Chief Executive Officer, both effective today.”

In a statement posted to LinkedIn on Monday, Levinsohn wrote, “After 4 1/2 years, today is my last day at The Arena Group.” He did not address the AI scandal, but stated that “the company is positioned well for the future.”

Bhargava owns a majority stake in the Arena Group. The company also fired three top executives last week: COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

Kraft joined the company in 2018 as chief revenue officer. Barrett, a veteran of Hearst Newspapers and Yahoo News, was named Arena Group president in 2021. According to the company’s still-online bio of Fenster, she had been with the group since January 2022.

The company claimed the reports and fake profiles of the “writers” associated with them were licensed content from a third party company called AdVon Commerce, who had reassured them that the authors were humans.

Three weeks ago, Levinsohn was touting The Arena Group’s “strong” third quarter on LinkedIn. Per The company’s financial site, The Street, its year-over-year revenue growth was up 11% and it had lowered operating expenses by 4%.

Prior to becoming CEO of The Arena Group, Levinsohn held senior roles at Yahoo, Fox Interactive and Tribune Publishing.

He also served as publisher of the Los Angeles Times for five months in 2018. He stepped down after NPR reported that he had been hit with two sexual harassment lawsuits for his “frat-boy” behavior. An investigation by Tribune Publishing Company, then known as “Tronc,” cleared Levinsohn of wrongdoing at the time.

Levinsohn became the CEO of Sports Illustrated in October 2019 and CEO of The Arena Group in August 2020.

The use of AI in media has been a hot button issue for several publishers, with several, including News Corp., which owns and operates the New York Post and The Wall Street Journal, embracing the seemingly inevitable technology.



Gizmodo ran an AI-generated “Star Wars” list in July that was riddled with errors. Deputy editor James Whitbrook, who said he was only notified of the article 10 minutes before it was published, blasted it as “f—king dogs—t.”

The Arena Group also owns Parade and Men’s Journal and is in the process of combining with Bridge Media Networks.. Digital publisher The Arena Group, which owns and operates Sports Illustrated and other major publications, announced this week that it had fired Sports Illustrated CEO Ross Levinsohn effective immediately.

“Today, the board of directors of The Arena Group Holdings, Inc. (NYSE American: AREN) met and took actions to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company,” the company said in a statement. “The board terminated the employment of CEO Ross Levinsohn, and named Manoj Bhargava as interim Chief Executive Officer, both effective today.”

The company declined to go into further detail about what specifically led to Levinsohn’s removal and, when asked if it was related to a recent scandal involving the company allegedly publishing AI-generated content from fake authors, a spokesperson said: “We have nothing further to add to the company’s prior statements regarding A.I.”

The Arena Group noted in its statement that it had also recently fired operations president and COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett, and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

“All of the media brands, including Sports Illustrated, will continue to operate with the management of those verticals, while the company just takes a broad view of operations and how to improve the business overall,” a company spokesperson told CNN.

A report late last month from Futurism laid out examples of authors whose personas existed only on the website of the leading American sports magazine, which also allegedly used artificial intelligence to churn out articles.

“The content is absolutely AI-generated,” an anonymous source told Futurism. “No matter how much they say that it’s not.”

CLICK HERE TO GET THE DAILYWIRE+ APP

According to the outlet, Sports Illustrated listed a writer named “Drew Ortiz” — a white young-adult male with short brown hair and blue eyes who grew up in a farmhouse and enjoyed the greater outdoors. But the profile photo paired with Ortiz’s biography is a headshot listed for sale on a website that sells AI-generated photos.

“There’s a lot,” another source told Futurism. “I was like, what are they? This is ridiculous. This person does not exist.”

“At the bottom [of the page] there would be a photo of a person and some fake description of them like, ‘Oh, John lives in Houston, Texas. He loves yard games and hanging out with his dog, Sam.’ Stuff like that. It’s just crazy.”

TheStreet, another publication owned by The Arena Group, was also found to have allegedly engaged in similar practices, according to the report.

When Futurism asked the magazine’s publisher, The Arena Group, for comment, the company did not respond immediately.. Sports Illustrated publisher The Arena Group has fired two senior executives, COO Andrew Kraft and President Rob Barrett, following its recent AI fiasco.

The dismissals were confirmed by a representative for Arena Group majority owner Manoj Bhargava, the billionaire 5-hour Energy magnate who acquired a majority stake in the media company back in August.

Arena Group's CEO Ross Levinsohn will stay in his role as chief executive.

Speaking to Futurism, Bhargava's rep claimed the dismissals were unrelated to recent revelations about Arena Group's use of AI or the resulting damage to the reputation of Sports Illustrated and Arena Group writ large — and that the cuts were made as part of Bhargava's overall reorganization plan.

The C-suite shuffle comes just over a week after a Futurism report revealed that Sports Illustrated and Arena Group-owned finance site TheStreet had been publishing affiliate link-laden commerce articles under the bylines of fake writers. Sources close to the creation of that fake author-bylined content told Futurism that the text itself was AI-generated, and published without proper automation disclosures. For their part, The Arena Group claimed that the third-party content provider that created the posts, AdVon Commerce, used fake authors as simple "pen names" for real people, and that no AI was used. Sure!

A botched AI program that involved lying to readers about the nature of the content they're consuming isn't Arena Group's only problem. Its stock has been plunging for quite some time; the AI news caused another significant hit, but the company hasn't seemed to be on excellent footing for a while now.

We reached out to both Kraft and Barrett's company emails, but those messages bounced. The two executives have also since been removed from the Arena Group's Slack channels, according to screenshots viewed by Futurism.

The news — to even casual observers — can't be all that surprising. The revelations about AI left a bad taste in the mouths of media consumers near and far, to say nothing of the Arena Group's own employees. And while Barghava might chalk it up to an overall restructuring effort: Hell of a time to start that work.

Disclosure: Futurism's parent company, Recurrent Ventures, previously worked with AdVon in 2022 via its partnership to distribute select content on third-party e-commerce platforms. This content was written by Recurrent’s contributors. Presently, Recurrent maintains a business relationship with them to test Commerce content internationally for select brands (of which Futurism is not one). AdVon content has never been published on Futurism or any of Recurrent's websites.

More on Sports Illustrated and its AI saga: Sports Illustrated Published Articles by Fake, AI-Generated Writers. Sports Illustrated’s owner fired two top executives in the wake of the scandal that saw the iconic organization post AI-generated content credited to fake authors.

Front Office Sports reported that Andrew Kraft, COO of SI’s parent company The Arena Group and Rob Barrett, president of media, were given the boot Wednesday after the organization ended up with egg on its face for not disclosing the nature of the AI-generated reports, first revealed by Futurism.

Kraft joined the company in 2018 at chief revenue officer. Barrett, a veteran of Hearts Newspapers and Yahoo News, was named Arena Group president in 2021.

Futurism reported that a representative said the dismissals were unrelated to the AI scandal. The company said in a statement to Future of Sports that “some adjustments to the business have been made to improve efficiency and revenue, and also some changes to senior management have been made.”

The company claimed the reports and fake profiles of the “writers” behind them were licensed content from a third party company called AdVon Commerce. They were assured the authors were humans, The Arena Group said. The company’s finance site TheStreet was also caught up in the scandal. The company also owns Parade and Men’s Journal, along with a number of smaller titles, and is in the process of combining with Bridge Media Networks.

The Arena Group’s stock leaped on the news, adding 35 cents, or 11.9%, to $3.29. The lightly-traded shares ended Wednesday’s session down 65% since the start of the year.

Manoj Bhargava, the billionaire 5-hour Energy magnate who bought a controlling stake in The Arena Group in August, took over running the company with a “meandering” 90-minute video call with staffers Wednesday, Front Office Sports reported.

The call did not include a discussion of the AI debacle, the report said. But during the call, Bhargava told employees to “stop doing dumb stuff.”

“No one is important,” Bhargava told staffers, according to the report. “I am not important. … The amount of useless stuff you guys do is staggering.”

Matthew Lombardi, Arena Group senior vice president of growth, is expected to have “an expanded role” in the new leadership. Katie Kulik, named The Arena Group’s chief revenue officer last month, will lead the business side.

Arena Group’s CEO Ross Levinsohn will remain CEO, Futurism reported. He has held the position since 2020.

The company is also in the midst of a board shakeup that relates to the combination with Bridge Media. In a regulatory filing on Tuesday, it named Cavitt Randall and Christopher Fowler as new board members to replace Todd Sims and Daniel Shribman. Sims, a board member since 2918, and Shribman, who held a seat since 2021, resigned on Nov. 29.

Randall, 45, is CEO of investment firm MBX Clearing, an affiliate of Simplify Inventions, Bhargava’s company. Fowler, 64, is chief investment officer of MBX.. In a story that has generated both shock and disdain, Futurism’s Maggie Harrison reports that Sports Illustrated published stories that were produced or partially produced by artificial intelligence, and that some stories had bylines of fake authors. To be clear, the disdain was directed at Sports Illustrated.

But maybe we shouldn’t be surprised by any of this, as I’ll explain in a moment. First, the details.

When asked about fake authors, an anonymous source described as a “person involved with the creation of the content” told Harrison, “There’s a lot. I was like, what are they? This is ridiculous. This person does not exist. At the bottom (of the page) there would be a photo of a person and some fake description of them like, ‘oh, John lives in Houston, Texas. He loves yard games and hanging out with his dog, Sam.’ Stuff like that. It’s just crazy.”

The fake authors even included AI-generated mugshots. If true, that is pretty gross — photos of authors who don’t actually exist, to go along with made-up bios that included made-up hobbies and even made-up pets.

Another source told Harrison, “The content is absolutely AI-generated, no matter how much they say that it’s not.”

Harrison wrote that after reaching out to Sports Illustrated’s publisher, The Arena Group, the AI-generated authors disappeared from Sports Illustrated’s site without explanation.

Harrison wrote that none of the stories that appeared to be generated by AI with fake authors “contained any disclosure about the use of AI or that the writer wasn’t real, though they did eventually gain a disclaimer explaining that the content was ‘created by a 3rd party,’ and that the ‘Sports Illustrated editorial staff are not involved in the creation of this content.’”

It actually gets even worse, if you can imagine. Harrison wrote that sometimes an author’s name was removed and replaced with another fake author. Harrison wrote, “Each time an author was switched out, the posts they supposedly penned would be reattributed to the new persona, with no editor’s note explaining the change in byline.”

The stories in question do not appear to be the traditional sports features we’re all familiar with when it comes to Sports Illustrated. The stories were more along the lines of product features and reviews. For example, one story from 2022 was about the best volleyballs.

Not that it makes any difference.

The Sports Illustrated Union put out a statement saying it was “horrified” by the details in the Futurism story. It went on to say, “If true, these practices violate everything we believe in about journalism. We deplore being associated with something so disrespectful to our readers.”

The union went on to call for “answers and transparency” from The Arena Group, adding, “We demand the company commit to adhering to basic journalistic standards, including not publishing computer-written stories by fake people.”

It also said, “What is described in this Futurism story does not represent the hardworking journalists who make up the SI Union.”

It was signed by “The Humans of the SI Union.”

Then, late in the day on Monday, a spokesperson for The Arena Group put out this statement:

Today, an article was published alleging that Sports Illustrated published AI-generated articles. According to our initial investigation, this is not accurate. The articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce. A number of AdVon’s e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised. AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans. According to AdVon, their writers, editors, and researchers create and curate content and follow a policy that involves using both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software on all content. However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy – actions we strongly condemn – and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.

The Arena Group has operated Sports Illustrated since 2019.

Sports Illustrated senior writer Michael Rosenberg tweeted earlier in the day, “Our staff works so hard to carry on Sports Illustrated’s tradition of great journalism. It’s so disappointing when people* in our own company undermine our work.”

IT’S GIVING TUESDAY. Has Poynter made a difference in your journalism career, knowledge or understanding? Today is #GivingTuesday and an opportunity for you to pay it forward by making a gift. Thank you for your generous support!

So now to the part where we shouldn’t be surprised.

Back in February, The Wall Street Journal’s Alexandra Bruell wrote a story with the headline, “Sports Illustrated Publisher Taps AI to Generate Articles, Story Ideas.”

Bruell wrote that The Arena Group, which also publishes Men’s Journal, TheStreet and Dealbreaker, was using AI to generate stories that pull information from its own library of content.

Bruell wrote, “Some articles in Men’s Journal are already AI-generated, the company said, such as ‘Proven Tips to Help You Run Your Fastest Mile Yet,’ and ‘The Best Ways for Men Over 40 to Maintain Muscle.’ The articles were created based on information from 17 years of archived stories from Men’s Fitness, a brand that exists under Men’s Journal.”

Those stories included a disclaimer that said they used “deep-learning tools for retrieval combined with OpenAI’s large language model for various stages of the workflow.” They also said, “This article was reviewed and fact-checked by our editorial team.”

Bruell wrote at the time, “Arena Group said it isn’t looking to replace journalists. Rather, the goal is to support content workflows, video creation, newsletters, sponsored content and marketing campaigns.”

None of this makes it right. But the point is we should’ve seen this all coming.

And yet Monday’s Futurism story has again unsettled journalists concerned about AI-created content, especially when you see a name such as Sports Illustrated involved. Earlier this year, Gannett paused using AI-generated content for some high school sports stories. (It’s the second item in my newsletter from Aug. 29.)

Awful Announcing’s Ben Axelrod wrote, “As AI technology becomes increasingly more prominent, it’s likely only a matter of time until it’s an accepted part of the sports media experience. Thus far, however, the use of AI in the industry has predominantly been premature and only resulted in embarrassment for well-established brands. That now includes Sports Illustrated, which has seen no shortage of controversies since it was purchased by Authentic Brands Group and licensed to The Arena Group (formerly Maven) in 2019. It’s hard to imagine that the use of AI-generated content will do anything but continue to damage an already diminished trust from its audience.”

In a strongly worded statement on X, former Sports Illustrated writer Jeff Pearlman wrote, “It sucks,” and mentioned some of the legends that built Sports Illustrated into an elite publication: Frank Deford, Dan Jenkins, Richard Hoffer and Steve Rushin.

“But this is what we’ve done,” Pearlman continued, “with the continued corporatization of media. These companies don’t care about content. At all. It’s entirely clicks and ads and ads and clicks. That’s it, that’s all. I’m not particularly sad, because the Sports Illustrated I loved and worked for … 52 issues a year, 5,000-word pieces, a devotion to craftsmanship, detail, heart and love … is long gone. It just is. This isn’t Sports Illustrated. It’s some bull (expletive) company picking off the last pieces of rotted fat from the carcass of something that was truly great.”

The book on Trump

Few if any journalists have covered Donald Trump more intently than The New York Times’ Maggie Haberman and Jonathan Swan. Aside from covering Trump for the Times, Haberman wrote a best-selling book about him called “Confidence Man,” and Swan conducted one of the most famous interviews with Trump on HBO, back when Swan was with Axios.

Now the two plan to write a book about what figures to be Trump’s final act — whatever that may be. While what figures to be the definitive book on Trump won’t be published until far in the future, there was already an intense bidding war among publishers.

Already, though, Axios’ Mike Allen reports that Simon and Schuster won out and will publish the book. Allen wrote, “The duo’s untitled Trump project aims to be more enduring than a campaign book — with plenty of juicy inside-the-room detail, but also the larger story of this singular figure in global affairs and public life for the past decade. And, of course, it’ll likely be part courtroom drama.”

Hearst Connecticut expands

For this item, I turn it over to Poynter media business analyst Rick Edmonds.

Hearst expanded its considerable presence in Connecticut Monday with a tentative agreement to buy the Record-Journal of Meriden. Hearst Connecticut Media Group has been growing by acquisition every couple of years since 2007. It now has 16 websites and eight dailies, including the Stamford Advocate, Connecticut Post (of Bridgeport) and New Haven Register. The group has also established a presence in Hartford, home to MediaNews Group’s Hartford Courant.

Editor-in-chief Wendy Metcalfe emailed me that the group is nearing a goal of 100,000 paid print and digital subscribers. It has more than 150 journalists and will increase that when the deal closes, Metcalfe said. The concentrated presence allows for centralized pagination, sports coverage and ad sales.

On the seller side, the Record-Journal and its weeklies are a fifth-generation family-owned organization. For several years now, family groups have been selling upstream where economies of scale control the costs of a transition to a digital focus.

Scary stuff

Esquire contributing reporter Chris Heath has a new piece out: “In the War Room with Steve Bannon”

Here’s the opening about one of Trump’s key advisers:

“Donald Trump won the 2020 election,” Steve Bannon pronounces. “Of that there is not even a question.” Obviously you expect me not to agree with you, I say. “Of course I expect you not to agree with me,” he says. “And I’m also not looking for you to agree with me. And I also don’t give a (expletive) who in the mainstream media agrees or disagrees with me.” And so off we go — about this and about COVID (the Bannon view: “It’s 100 percent a bioweapon — [expletive] not even a question”) and about vaccines (“I would never in ten million years get this vaccine,” Bannon says, and asks if I would; I simply hand him my vax card, which he looks at with apparent amazement: “I’ve never …”) and about what I view — but naturally Bannon doesn’t — as his incessant anti-Semitic dog-whistling. At one point, he rhapsodizes about the range of information available to people these days. Or misinformation, I say. “A wide range of information,” he counters. “One man’s misinformation may be somebody else’s Holy Grail, right?” I hardly agree — this seems a terrifying equivalence to me — but he’s already on to something else.

You need to read the rest. It’s some scary stuff. Which is why you need to read it.

Politician of the year?

Fox News political contributor Juan Williams, who used to be a co-host of Fox News’ “The Five,” wrote a column for The Hill about his 2023 politician of the year: Florida Republican Congressman Matt Gaetz.

Williams didn’t mean it as a compliment. Williams wrote, “Gaetz deserves a place in history. He is a living monument to an era of elected Republican officials with no interest in governing.”

Williams noted how Gaetz was a driving force behind Kevin McCarthy needing forever — actually 15 votes — to be elected speaker of the House. And how the government screeched to a halt for three weeks in October after McCarthy was removed as speaker.

Williams wrote, “Gaetz takes the prize, for successfully paralyzing the House for the entire year. With his hands on the wheel and driving toward revenge and chaos — all to raise his personal profile and stir up small, online donations — Gaetz crashed the House of Representatives in a ditch on a low road. As a result of his tactics, the people’s House, one of the world’s great democratic institutions, is now commonly derided by citizens on the left and right as a clown show.”

Moving up to the big leagues

Everyone wants a career in baseball, right? Even media executives, it would seem.

M. Scott Havens is leaving his job as CEO of Bloomberg Media to become president of business operations for the New York Mets. Havens was promoted to the CEO role at Bloomberg Media in January 2022 when Justin Smith left to help launch Semafor, a global news startup.

Havens’ role with the Mets will be on the business side of things, not the actual baseball side.

Michael Bloomberg, the founder of Bloomberg Media, wrote in a memo that CFO and COO Karen Saltser will become interim CEO.

Media tidbits

Hot type

More resources for journalists

Subscribe to PolitiFact’s weekly newsletter. Get facts delivered straight to your inbox

Poynter ACES Introductory Certificate in Editing (Online) — Enroll now.

How to Improve Your Coverage of LGBTQ+ Communities (Webinar) — Start anytime.

Got a story you’d like to write for Poynter? Email pitch@poynter.org with your idea, approximate timeline and word count.

Have feedback or a tip? Email Poynter senior media writer Tom Jones at tjones@poynter.org.

The Poynter Report is our daily media newsletter. To have it delivered to your inbox Monday-Friday, sign up here.. . Sports Illustrated published articles by fake authors with AI-generated profile pictures, Futurism reported.

The magazine denied using AI but said it would take down the articles while it investigated.

It's the latest publication to get called out for apparently using AI.

NEW LOOK Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address Sign up By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . You can opt-out at any time.

Advertisement

Sports Illustrated has become the latest publication to get called out for using artificial intelligence to generate content.

The magazine said it will take down several articles after a report found they were written by fake, AI-generated authors.

Futurism identified two Sports Illustrated writers, " Drew Ortiz" and " Sora Tanaka ," whose biographies appeared to be fake. Their photos are available on sites selling AI-generated headshots under the labels "neutral white young-adult male" and "joyful asian young-adult female."

The articles under their bylines are also full of the clunky language typical of AI-generated content. A piece by Ortiz's warns that volleyball "can be a little tricky to get into, especially without an actual ball to practice with."

Advertisement

Two anonymous sources involved in the creation of the articles in question told Futurism that Sports Illustrated had been using AI to create fake author profiles, and said that some articles under their names were generated by AI.

Related stories

In a statement to Futurism, Sports Illustrated owner Arena Group denied publishing AI-generated articles but said they were removing the pieces while an internal investigation took place.

An Arena representative said the articles were "licensed content" produced by "an external, third-party company" named AdVon Commerce, in a now-defunct partnership.

In February the Sports Illustrated publisher announced it would begin experimenting with AI, with Arena CEO Ross Levinsohn saying the company would not "crank out AI content."

Advertisement

It's not the only digital publisher to get in hot waters over AI. Newspaper publisher Gannett paused its rollout of AI-generated sports articles in August after they were mocked on social media for bizarre phrasing. One report described a college football game as a "close encounter of the athletic kind."

Tech publication CNET, meanwhile, scrapped its own AI experiment earlier this year after articles were found to have numerous inaccuracies .

The explosion in popularity of generative AI has raised fears that tools such as ChatGPT could be used to flood the web with substandard and plagiarized content.

A report from NewsGuard in August identified dozens of sites using chatbots to churn out news stories from respected outlets, describing it as "turbocharged plagiarism."

Advertisement

Arena Group did not immediately respond to a request for comment from Business Insider, made outside normal working hours.. Sports Illustrated may have used artificial intelligence to create articles — and even entire “authors” on its website.

According to a new report from Futurism, SI routinely uses AI to generate articles, attributes the writing of those articles to writers who don’t exist, and uses AI-generated pictures to give the fake authors a visual presence.

Sports Illustrated has been publishing stories written by AI — and attributing them to writers that don't exist.



Profiles for fake authors used AI-generated headshots and made-up bios.



When asked about it, all content was deleted.



(h/t @futurism) pic.twitter.com/8PAMzk9h0q — Front Office Sports (@FOS) November 27, 2023

The prime example — “Drew Ortiz” — had a generic biography on his author page and his profile picture can be traced back to a website that sells AI-generated portraits.

SI regularly cycles the AI-created authors out of its system and replaces them with new ones, per Futurism, including when the tech publication reached out to SI parent The Arena Group to respond to the accusations.

In a statement to Front Office Office Sports, a TAG spokesperson said that the articles in question were licensed content of product reviews from a third party called AdVon Commerce.

“AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans,” they said. “However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we don’t condone — and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership.”

The Sports Illustrated Union, which represents the outlet’s writers, released a statement saying it was “horrified” by the report and demanding “answers and transparency” from its parent.

“If true, these practices violate everything we believe in about journalism,” the union said. “We deplore being associated with something so disrespectful to our readers.”

The Arena Group has ventured into AI-generated content for several of its other properties: TheStreet, Men’s Journal, and Dealbreaker have previously published AI-generated articles, per the Wall Street Journal.

In February, The Arena Group laid off 17 Sports Illustrated employees as part of restructuring.

FOS senior writer Michael McCarthy contributed reporting for this story.. At HuffPost, we believe that everyone needs high-quality journalism, but we understand that not everyone can afford to pay for expensive news subscriptions. That is why we are committed to providing deeply reported, carefully fact-checked news that is freely accessible to everyone.

Whether you come to HuffPost for updates on the 2024 presidential race, hard-hitting investigations into critical issues facing our country today, or trending stories that make you laugh, we appreciate you. The truth is, news costs money to produce, and we are proud that we have never put our stories behind an expensive paywall.

Would you join us to help keep our stories free for all? Your contribution of as little as $2 will go a long way.. CEO of The Arena Group and Sports Illustrated Ross Levinsohn at the 2023 Sports Illustrated Sportsperson Of The Year Award last week.

The CEO of the parent company of Sports Illustrated was ousted on Monday.

The firing followed a scandal over the publication’s use of AI-generated stories from fake authors, although it was not immediately clear if that was related to the shakeup.

Ross Levinsohn, CEO of The Arena Group, was terminated and Manoj Bhargava was named interim chief executive officer, the company said. No other information was provided, other than that the board met “and took actions to improve the operational efficiency and revenue of the company.”

Last week, the company fired operations president and COO Andrew Kraft, media president Rob Barrett and corporate counsel Julie Fenster.

Levinsohn had been in his role since 2020. He had previously been a top executive at Yahoo, Fox Interactive and Tribune Publishing.

A recent piece on the web site Futurism alleged that stories on the Sports Illustrated web site “were churned out using AI,” and that the contributor profiles on many of them were also AI-generated, right down to the author photos, which Futurism’s researchers claim they found on sites selling AI-generated images.

The site also alleges it found similar content on The Street.com, which Arena Group bought from co-founder Jim Cramer in 2019. There was also a controversy earlier this year when Men’s Journal, another Arena Group publication, published an Ai-generated medical article reportedly riddled with “inaccuracies and falsehoods.”

The union representing editorial staff said that it was “horrified” by the report.

A spokesperson the The Arena Group said that “the articles in question were product reviews and were licensed content from an external, third-party company, AdVon Commerce. A number of AdVon’s e-commerce articles ran on certain Arena websites. We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised.”

AdVon, the statement says, “has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans. According to AdVon, their writers, editors, and researchers create and curate content and follow a policy that involves using both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software on all content. However, we have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy.”

Arena Group ended the partnership with AdVon, according to the spokesperson.

Tom Tapp contributed to this report.. . CNN —

Sports Illustrated on Monday said it had deleted several articles from its website after a report found the once-celebrated legacy magazine had published the pieces under fake author names and profile images generated by artificial intelligence.

The report, which was published by Futurism, found that the magazine had repeatedly published articles whose authors could not be found online outside the Sports Illustrated website. The articles were all accompanied by AI-generated profile photos that Futurism also found for sale on digital marketplaces that sell AI-produced headshots.

During the course of Futurism’s reporting, some of the alleged Sports Illustrated writers mysteriously vanished from the publication’s website — and their articles began appearing under the names of different authors who similarly didn’t appear to exist online and whose likenesses were also being sold on AI headshot marketplaces.

Following the publication of the report, a spokesperson for The Arena Group — which has operated and licensed Sports Illustrated since 2019 — told CNN that the deleted product review articles had been created by a third-party company, AdVon Commerce.

“We have learned that AdVon had writers use a pen or pseudo name in certain articles to protect author privacy — actions we don’t condone — and we are removing the content while our internal investigation continues and have since ended the partnership,” the spokesperson said.

Writers, editors, and researchers at AdVon create content following a policy that makes use of both counter-plagiarism and counter-AI software, the Arena Group spokesperson said.

“We continually monitor our partners and were in the midst of a review when these allegations were raised,” the spokesperson told CNN. “AdVon has assured us that all of the articles in question were written and edited by humans.”

AdVon did not respond to a CNN request for comment. But the questions raised Monday marked the second time in as many months that AdVon has found itself at the center of an AI publishing controversy.

In October, Gannett-owned Reviewed came under fire following reports it had used AI to produce stories. A similar investigation followed: The website contained several stories written by authors who couldn’t be found online and whose colleagues couldn’t confirm their existence. But Gannett denied the articles had been written with the use of AI.

Following Futurism’s report Monday, the Sports Illustrated Union, which represents staff writers for the magazine, said that its members were “horrified” by the allegations.

“If true, these practices violate everything we believe in about journalism,” the union said in a statement. “We deplore being associated with something so disrespectful to our readers.”

Sports Illustrated writers also reacted with disgust in social media posts.

“Along with basic principles of honesty, trust, journalistic ethics, etc. — I take seriously the weight of a Sports Illustrated byline,” Emma Baccellieri, a staff writer for the magazine, posted to X. “It meant something to me long before I ever dreamed of working here. This report was horrifying to read.”

“The practices described in the story published today do real damage to the credibility of the hardworking humans I have been honored to work with for the past 9 years,” added Mitch Goldich, another writer and editor at the magazine, posted on X.

The Arena Group is not the first publishing company to be ensnared by the rapid deployment of AI. Since the technology’s explosion on the commercial scene nearly one year ago, several news organizations have begun deploying AI to partially automate and expedite the publication of certain kinds of stories, with mixed results. For instance, the Online News Association has published a practical guide for newsrooms to navigate the technology.

Still, news organizations are typically wary of producing entire stories using AI, as Gannett learned this summer during an experiment with the technology in which the platform produced several botched high school sports articles.. 