Someday we’ll move past the point where you can spend half an hour pumping out an AI video and generate headlines. Sadly, we’re not there yet. The latest piece of refuse from the AI hype machine comes in the form of an unauthorized, “AI-generated” George Carlin comedy special—one that practically no one, not even people involved with it, seems to like. It was apparently made without permission from the late comedian’s family or any semblance of good taste, but here’s the best part: it’s not even clear how much of the special was actually created with AI in the first place.

Welcome back to the Dumbest Tech News of the Week, Gizmodo’s Monday column where we dive into the best of the worst that technology has to offer. This week we’re exploring Dudesy, an AI comedy podcast and video channel run by comedian Will Sasso, writer Chad Kultgen, and a tech company they refuse to name. On Tuesday, Dudesy released the special, “George Carlin: I’m Glad I’m Dead.” Even Sasso and Kultgen seem uncomfortable with the project, and that’s to say nothing of the countless bad reviews and outrage from Carlin’s family. In other words: it’s dumb.



Advertisement

“It’s ghoulish,” said Carlin’s daughter Kelly Carlin in an interview with Gizmodo. “Dead people don’t get to have a vote, and that’s what’s particularly disturbing to me about this. They’re voting for him. They’re deciding that this is ok to do and it’s a disrespect to his autonomy. It’s a violation of his humanity and his personhood, and, of course, his creative integrity. Ethically, it’s the stinkiest move I could imagine.”

The special opens with an AI-generated voice describing the work it did to create the special, as though the robot did the work itself.

Advertisement

“My name is Dudesy, and I’m a comedy AI,” the voice says. “What you’re about to hear is not George Carlin. It’s my impersonation of George Carlin that I developed in the exact same way a human impressionist would. I listened to all of George Carlin’s material and did my best to imitate his voice, cadence, and attitude, as well as the subject matter I think would have interested him today.”

It then launches into an hour-long simulacrum of standup comedy in which a voice that sounds a lot like George Carlin, who died in 2008, entertains a pretend audience.

Advertisement

“I’m sorry it took me so long to come out with new material, but I do have a pretty good excuse…” AI Carlin says, pausing for dramatic effect. “I was dead!” The crudely generated sounds of an artificial audience roar in laughter and applause.

Some commenters seem charmed by the standup special, but calling the reviews “mixed” would be generous. Dozens of journalists fired up Google Docs to take cheap shots at the AI Carlin (can you image something so debased) but the loudest response came from the standup legend’s daughter. Kelly Carlin said Dudesy never contacted her or her father’s estate and told Gizmodo she’s considering legal action.



Advertisement

“He really hated people putting words in his mouth,” Kelly Carlin said. “This thing is the most egregious possible version of that.”



Back in 1999, a sort of early text meme falsely attributed to George Carlin went viral over forwarded email messages. The maudlin essay, titled “The Paradox of Our Time in History,” bothered the comedian so much he kept a statement explaining that he didn’t write it on the front page of his website:



Advertisement

“Most of this ‘humor’ on the Internet is just plain stupid,” George Carlin wrote. “I guess hard-core fans who follow my stuff closely would be able to spot the fake stuff because the tone of voice is so different. But a casual fan has no way of knowing, and it bothers me that some people might believe I’d actually be capable of writing some of this stuff.”



Advertisement

You might think Dudesy’s human companions would stand by its work, but Sasso and Kultgen started distancing themselves from AI Carlin before it was even released.

“I personally don’t want to hear a fucking Nirvana song that’s not written by Kurt Cobain and played by fucking Nirvana. It’s not real and it doesn’t matter. Anyone can do an impression,” Sasso said on episode 87 of the Dudesy podcast (available in both video and audio). “Dudesy has consumed every George Carlin special and has pulled off something miraculous, but it’s not, by definition, new. It’s taken from a bunch of other shit.”

Advertisement

Sasso and Kultgen collaborate on the Dudesy project with an unnamed tech company; the pair say a non-disclosure agreement prevents them from revealing the organization’s name. If you take the podcast at face value, the company makes Dudesy’s work independently and presents it to the hosts without letting them know what’s in store. On the podcast episode introducing AI Carlin, Sasso and Kultgen seem to be hearing about the special for the first time.

“Oh man,” Sasso said, taking his head in his hands as Dudsey explained the Carlin project. “I don’t know what any of this means.”



Advertisement

Sasso and Kultgen celebrate Dudesy, which they talk to as though it’s alive. But the two are visibly uncomfortable about the Carlin project and argue about whether the public will welcome the rising flood of AI art.

“What about the next step? Is Dudesy going to do its own hour of standup?” Kultgen asked. “What about a fully AI standup comedian?”

Advertisement

“Nobody gives a fuck about that,” Sasso said.

There’s no video to go along with the AI Carlin special. You can watch it on YouTube, but it’s just the fake Carlin’s voice speaking over a slideshow of hastily-generated AI art. And while the audio clearly seems generated by an algorithm, the content itself raises questions.

Advertisement

Dudesy suggests, in vague terms, that AI tools made the special from top to bottom. Presumably, the fake words our hallucinated Carlin speaks were generated with something like ChatGPT. But while large-language models can produce incredibly convincing text, the whole thing feels a little too polished. The script doesn’t have the hallmarks of AI authorship; it seems a little too good to be true. Because the company behind Dudesy is some kind of weird secret, it’s hard to say for sure.

We reached out to Sasso and Kultgen’s representatives to ask just how much human intervention went into “I’m Glad I’m Dead.” They didn’t respond.

Advertisement

In the special, the fake Carlin rails against conservatives, delves into the finer points of gun control, trans rights, and Elon Musk, and, predictably, discusses the future of artificial intelligence. It sounds a lot like the kinds of things Carlin might say if he were alive and on stage in 2024. Carlin’s presumably simulated voice tells us it’s the first comedian to be brought back from the dead, but it certainly won’t be the last. It goes on to suggest that AI is the future of standup and, in true Carlin form, says we shouldn’t be so precious about the whole thing. That’s a debate worth having, but one thing’s for sure: this Carlin special isn’t very funny.

“If I can’t be precious about his individual existence then I don’t know what we’re gonna do as a species,” Kelly Carlin said. “Of course, people get overly precious about art and things like that, but George Carlin did not write or perform this thing, so take his name off of it. It can be ‘inspired by,’ or ‘an homage to,’ or ‘Carlin-esque,’ or ‘in the style of.’ Call it something else, and then I dont give a shit. Standup is a lived human experience. Sure, a lot of people watch it on TV, but the standup comic has to leave their house and go to a theater to do the work, and it needs a live audience to react to it. An AI audience laughing at an AI thing is another art form.”

. An AI assisted podcast released a new comedy special featuring an AI-generated version of the late comedian George Carlin, and it’s worse than you could possibly imagine. An AI assisted podcast released a new comedy special featuring an AI-generated version of the late comedian George Carlin, and it’s worse than you could possibly imagine.

The cursed hour-long special is the work of Dudesy, a podcast hosted by Will Sasso and Chad Kultgen and curated by an AI program with the same name. At the start of the special, Dudesy intones that it devoured the work of the long dead comedic genius and rendered it into a terrible, hour-long facsimile of Carlin’s work called I’m Glad I’m Dead. It’s all on YouTube for everyone to cringe along to, and fair warning from a fan of the real Carlin such as myself: it can not be unseen. The cursed hour-long special is the work of Dudesy, a podcast hosted by Will Sasso and Chad Kultgen and curated by an AI program with the same name. At the start of the special, Dudesy intones that it devoured the work of the long dead comedic genius and rendered it into a terrible, hour-long facsimile of Carlin’s work called I’m Glad I’m Dead. It’s all on YouTube for everyone to cringe along to, and fair warning from a fan of the real Carlin such as myself: it can not be unseen.

Advertisement

The AI comedian, which is not funny and only sounds vaguely like Carlin, spends the hour riffing on various topics like Taylor Swift, U.S. gun culture—and of course, hyping the supposedly revolutionary potential of AI technology. The AI comedian, which is not funny and only sounds vaguely like Carlin, spends the hour riffing on various topics like Taylor Swift, U.S. gun culture—and of course, hyping the supposedly revolutionary potential of AI technology.

Carlin’s family did not give Dudesy permission to create the special, and his daughter, Kelly, publicly denounced it on X. “My dad spent a lifetime perfecting his craft from his very human life, brain and imagination. No machine will ever replace his genius,” she wrote on the website formerly known as Twitter. “These AI generated products are clever attempts at trying to recreate a mind that will never exist again. Let’s let the artist’s work speak for itself. Humans are so afraid of the void that we can’t let what has fallen into it stay there.” Carlin’s family did not give Dudesy permission to create the special, and his daughter, Kelly, publicly denounced it on X.My dad spent a lifetime perfecting his craft from his very human life, brain and imagination. No machine will ever replace his genius,” she wrote on the website formerly known as Twitter. “These AI generated products are clever attempts at trying to recreate a mind that will never exist again. Let’s let the artist’s work speak for itself. Humans are so afraid of the void that we can’t let what has fallen into it stay there.”

Sasso and Kultgen played a clip of the Carlin-bot on their show before Sasso and Kultgen played a clip of the Carlin-bot on their show before dropping the entire special on YouTube. The pair seemed visibly uncomfortable during the segment—Sasso especially. The former Mad TV comedian lambasted AI comedy.

"I personally dont want to hear a fuckin' Nirvana song that’s not written by Kurt Cobain and played by fuckin' Nirvana, I dont give a shit, I don't give a shit. It's not real, it doesn't matter," Sasso said. "Anyone can do an impression, Dudesy is doing an impression…I don't think a new comic has anything to worry about because we need new voices." "I personally dont want to hear a fuckin' Nirvana song that’s not written by Kurt Cobain and played by fuckin' Nirvana, I dont give a shit, I don't give a shit. It's not real, it doesn't matter," Sasso said. "Anyone can do an impression, Dudesy is doing an impression…I don't think a new comic has anything to worry about because we need new voices."

Advertisement

"Dudesy has consumed every Carlin special and has pulled off something miraculous, but its not, by definition, new. It's taken from a bunch of other shit," Sasso said. "Dudesy has consumed every Carlin special and has pulled off something miraculous, but its not, by definition, new. It's taken from a bunch of other shit," Sasso said.

Despite the obvious discomfort, the pair still pushed people to watch the special. The podcast exists to promote Dudesy, and promote Dudesy they did. A screen behind their heads displayed the name of the AI model, and Sasso wore a large belt emblazoned with the AI’s logo. The Dudesy show launched in March 2022, and Despite the obvious discomfort, the pair still pushed people to watch the special. The podcast exists to promote Dudesy, and promote Dudesy they did. A screen behind their heads displayed the name of the AI model, and Sasso wore a large belt emblazoned with the AI’s logo. The Dudesy show launched in March 2022, and Sasso and Kultgen have said they can't reveal the company behind the AI due to a non-disclosure agreement.

The special is a little more than an hour long and begins with a disclaimer where the Dudesy AI explained it was doing an impression. It was intercut with crowd noises and featured AI-created images that reflected the bits. The gist of the special is that Carlin is back from the dead to tell some jokes and try to allay your fears about AI. The special is a little more than an hour long and begins with a disclaimer where the Dudesy AI explained it was doing an impression. It was intercut with crowd noises and featured AI-created images that reflected the bits. The gist of the special is that Carlin is back from the dead to tell some jokes and try to allay your fears about AI.

“AI will not replace most jobs, it's going to make them easier,” Dudesy as Carlin said in the special. “Right now, you should be watching a few YouTube videos to figure out how to train ChatGPT to do your job for you so you can dick off all day and still get a raise. And if AI does replace your job, rest assured the billionaires will still find a way to force you into wage slavery for $10 to $15 hours a day so you won’t have time to think about restructuring society into a more equitable model for everyone.” “AI will not replace most jobs, it's going to make them easier,” Dudesy as Carlin said in the special. “Right now, you should be watching a few YouTube videos to figure out how to train ChatGPT to do your job for you so you can dick off all day and still get a raise. And if AI does replace your job, rest assured the billionaires will still find a way to force you into wage slavery for $10 to $15 hours a day so you won’t have time to think about restructuring society into a more equitable model for everyone.”

Advertisement

The AI model then painted a picture of a horrifying world where all your dead favorite comedians are back, forever. “I might be the first standup comic brought back from the dead by AI but I certainly won’t be the last. Richard Pryor, Joan Rivers, Bill Hicks, Robin Williams, Dick Gregory, Andy Kaufman, Mom Mabley, Sam Kinnison,” it said. As it name-checks the dead, grotesque AI generated version of their faces flash on the screen. The AI model then painted a picture of a horrifying world where all your dead favorite comedians are back, forever. “I might be the first standup comic brought back from the dead by AI but I certainly won’t be the last. Richard Pryor, Joan Rivers, Bill Hicks, Robin Williams, Dick Gregory, Andy Kaufman, Mom Mabley, Sam Kinnison,” it said. As it name-checks the dead, grotesque AI generated version of their faces flash on the screen.

“Everybody’s coming back and we’re all gonna have our own 24 hour a day, 7 day a week, 365 day a year stream commenting on everything that’s happening in the world as it happens,” it said. “AI-resurrected standup comedians are gonna be the news anchors of the next decade. Which, now that I think of it, means news anchors are probably out of a job too.” “Everybody’s coming back and we’re all gonna have our own 24 hour a day, 7 day a week, 365 day a year stream commenting on everything that’s happening in the world as it happens,” it said. “AI-resurrected standup comedians are gonna be the news anchors of the next decade. Which, now that I think of it, means news anchors are probably out of a job too.”

Dudesy doing Carlin spins this as something to be embraced. Imagine Cosby jokes without all the Cosby sexual assault, it explained. What if we had Catholic priests without the crimes? AI, it said, will usher in a heavenly future with no theft. Save for, of course, the theft we’re witnessing before our very eyes as a machine scoops up a lifetime's work of an artist and uses it to spin a fairytale about a future where art is replaced by machines controlled by the wealthiest among us. Dudesy doing Carlin spins this as something to be embraced. Imagine Cosby jokes without all the Cosby sexual assault, it explained. What if we had Catholic priests without the crimes? AI, it said, will usher in a heavenly future with no theft. Save for, of course, the theft we’re witnessing before our very eyes as a machine scoops up a lifetime's work of an artist and uses it to spin a fairytale about a future where art is replaced by machines controlled by the wealthiest among us.

I’ll be honest. Fear is at the core of my disgust. The early battle against AI feels like it’s already over. The financial incentives are too great and the billionaires pushing AI will do anything to make a few extra bucks. The idea of stripping creative jobs from humans and ceding it to cheaper machines is just too lucrative an idea to pass on. I’ll be honest. Fear is at the core of my disgust. The early battle against AI feels like it’s already over. The financial incentives are too great and the billionaires pushing AI will do anything to make a few extra bucks. The idea of stripping creative jobs from humans and ceding it to cheaper machines is just too lucrative an idea to pass on.

But all this work is built on human training data. Midjourney can’t generate anything until it’s pored over millions of human created artworks. ChatGPT and other LLMs rely on vast swaths of copyrighted material created by human hands. Dudesy can’t fart out a crass imitation of George Carlin without viewing 14 standup specials that are the sum of a human’s life, dreams, and labor. But all this work is built on human training data. Midjourney can’t generate anything until it’s pored over millions of human created artworks. ChatGPT and other LLMs rely on vast swaths of copyrighted material created by human hands. Dudesy can’t fart out a crass imitation of George Carlin without viewing 14 standup specials that are the sum of a human’s life, dreams, and labor.

AI will win in this battle, but I don’t believe it will win the war. It's an open question whether people will accept AI-generated content, and the public reception to the faux-Carlin special hasn't exactly been overwhelmingly positive. Even Sasso, a comedian linked to this project and ostensibly tasked with promoting it, doesn't really buy it. AI will win in this battle, but I don’t believe it will win the war. It's an open question whether people will accept AI-generated content, and the public reception to the faux-Carlin special hasn't exactly been overwhelmingly positive. Even Sasso, a comedian linked to this project and ostensibly tasked with promoting it, doesn't really buy it.. To even judge "George Carlin: I'm Glad I'm Dead," an hour-long YouTube video of bad AI-generated images, narrated and purportedly "written" and "performed" by a generative artificial intelligence model as an imitation of a dead famous human man, as a "comedy special" would be to lend it legitimacy. "I'm Glad I'm Dead" is a weak, watered down, boring approximation of the artistic performances a human person honed over the course of a lifetime by combining his experiences of living with Carlin's specific interpretation of the world and his incredible amount of work. And while his performances were insightful, upsetting, offensive, and cathartic, above all they were funny, and this shit is not funny at all.

But expressing an opinion like that comes with the implication that this computer's attempt at fake art was bad, and not that any computer's attempt at fake art is and will be bad. The very concept of a computer's attempt at fake art is bad. To quote a particular dead famous human man, it's all bullshit and it's bad for you.

I'd be worried about that if I thought "I'm Glad I'm Dead" was actually "written" by AI, but I don't. What we're talking about here is a combination of technologies that can be impressive--the Fake George Carlin of the video sounds a fair amount like George Carlin sounded and if you don't listen to the words or clock that "I'm Glad I'm Dead" is pretty radically devoid of actual humor, you might be briefly fooled. But the Large Language Models (LMM) we're talking about when we talk about "AI" "writing" something are statistical programs that use a lot of data to analyze patterns and then guess at making other patterns. An LLM cannot create anything new; it can only rearrange what it already has. And having watched "I'm Glad I'm Dead," I'm pretty sure this thing is more Mechanical Turk than Mr. Data.

Data was a computer that wanted to become a person. Today's AI exists mostly just to sell you computer things pretending to be people, but poorly.

"I'm Glad I'm Dead" is not an AI comedy special, so there's no danger of judging it as one and therefore legitimizing it as one. It's an ad for AI, both in its actual content--there's a whole section of "comedy" discussing how cool AI is, and of course it's the longest single segment of the video--and as an object that's meant to generate conversation, a trap I'm aware I'm currently falling into, for the overall goal of trying to sell your humanity back to you in gulps, like an industrial charlatan dipping a bottle into a clear stream owned by no one so they can charge you a buck-fifty for it.

The section on AI in particular gives away the game, if there's any such game to give away. Dudesy, the ostensible program ostensibly pretending to be a real human person, monologues at how strange it is to be afraid that AI will take the jobs of real human people. After all, it supposedly opines, since when do people like jobs and want to have them? Won't the world be better when AI does the stupid, menial things nobody wants to do, or makes your regular job easier?

It's ironic listening to Dudesy argue that fearing AI will steal jobs from real human people, a thing that is currently happening, is foolish, when "I'm Glad I'm Dead" itself is perfectly emblematic of evidence to the contrary. The monologue tries to suggest the inevitable march of automation as AI taking jobs because it can do them better and cheaper than the human people who currently do them. Dudesy demonstrates aptly the real issue, that human people who gather experience and develop skills and work to hone a craft will lose their livelihoods to computer programs that do the work worse, but do it cheaply, because their corporate owners don't care about the quality of the work done but about finding the perfect low-water mark of the absolute cheapest, and lowest-quality product that they can still sell--like "I'm Glad I'm Dead."

A nightmare image of an audience created by AI that appears in I'm Glad I'm Dead.

As a supposed AI, Dudesy can't understand that you have to work to be able to eat or have a place to live in this world, and the issue isn't that we'll lose our shitty jobs to a computer program, but that at the same time the jobs are going to computer programs that suck at them, the rich are lobbying for policies that jail you for being homeless and using made-up statistics to trick municipalities into assigning cops to guard every Walgreens.

The monologue--in a hilarious but inadvertent way, like when you used to make the SimpleText program read the word "penis" out loud in a middle school class--goes on to acknowledge that AI is taking a job right in front of you. AI will replace stand-up comedians, it says with a grandeur apparently meant to be ironic, and actually, that might be better, because imagine getting to enjoy the comedy of Bill Cosby or Louis CK without all the pesky sexual assaults. Wouldn't it be great to so thoroughly separate the art from the artist, and therefore completely defuse any guilt you might feel for consuming the art? The tech bros are desperate to do so, since they would love to keep selling you all that "content," without ever having to pay anyone for making it, and without you having to worry about what your money might support.

This is the real point of "I"m Glad I'm Dead," and one of the only parts of the entire video that's making a point that isn't both kind of self-evident and sounds almost exactly like or adjacent to things Carlin actually said. Earlier segments' big observations are that America has too many mass shootings, that both Democrats and Republicans really just serve the rich, and that the people you should be mad at are the billionaires (although not the billionaires pushing AI into every microwave and toothbrush; they're cool). By sounding like Carlin, they help make the sales pitch work a little better. If you think you're listening to Carlin tell you things you want to and expect to hear from him, like how much politicians suck, his credibility and your positive feelings about him color how you interpret Dudesy giving you the hard AI sell.

The AI portion also demonstrates, I think, that a real human person is actually hiding behind the curtain of Dudesy at least some of the time, pulling levers and twisting dials. An LLM can mention things but it cannot combine concepts into something new. It can't make observations because it fundamentally can't know what it's looking at. It can bring up Louis CK or Bill Cosby and it might even have data that adds the designators of "comedian" and "sexual assault" to those names, but it cannot understand that sexual assault is bad, because it is incapable of knowing what Bill Cosby, Louis CK, and sexual assault are. These jokes require: knowing the context of the comedians, understanding their fame and following, familiarity with their material and the larger culture around them, and crucially, knowing about their crimes and understanding why those things are crimes in the first place. These all combine to form a complete observation, and I don't buy that Dudesy is capable of that.

An AI-made image of Bill Cosby that appears in I'm Glad I'm Dead.

So either those remarks about AI allowing for "Bill Cosby jokes without the rape" and "Louis CK jokes about masturbating in front of people without the masturbating in front of people" were written by a real human person, or they were stolen from one.

And if that's the case, then the scam is laid bare, because the AI can't impersonate Carlin without the help from someone who understands the world well enough to write a Carlin-sounding Bill Cosby rape joke with a pro-AI spin. That's to say nothing of all the human labor done by whoever had to tune any content the AI did make--proofreading, cutting out nonsense or "hallucinations," tweaking the sound and cadence of the voice delivery to make it sound as human as possible, and so on. This is a performance to make you think AI creations might be cool, so you'll accept the future AI creations that will include less actual human input, and therefore be even worse. It's a project specifically meant to co-opt the goodwill you might feel about a real human person who honed their craft to trick you into buying a cheap knock-off. "I'm Glad I'm Dead" isn't funny, sure, but it has the rhythm of something funny you've heard before, with the hope that you'll say "eh, close enough," so that "close enough" can be pushed further and further away from the real thing.

The problem, though, isn't just the cheapness of the product, it's that AI must steal from people who did the work to begin with in order to create the product cheaply--people like George Carlin. It's a process that strips out humanity from all involved, including the people who didn't sign up to be involved. AI strips the humanity from artists because there's value in art, and the best way to maximize that value is to attempt to render the person and their creations into an easily reproducible, conveniently apportionable goo. But it also strips humanity from you, too. The same way it renders everyone who makes things into "content creators," it renders everyone who reads, watches, looks, listens, and feels into "consumers," and nothing more, because how can you be anything more than a consumer, if there's nothing more in that which you consume?

An AI-generated image from I'm Glad I'm Dead claiming that AI will make it so you work less, because don't worry, THIS time a tool that supposedly increases productivity will cut down on the amount of labor humans have to do.

So "I'm Glad I'm Dead" sucks in all the ways you think it does. It's full of crappy-looking images and it makes dull, pedestrian observations mostly ripped from or approximating things Carlin actually said. It's an obvious con job, a friend inviting you over for a dinner that turns out to be a multi-level marketing recruitment pitch, and the fact it even attempts such a ghoulish enterprise as to poorly imitate a real human person for a snake oil-selling gimmick makes it fundamentally gross.

But it also sucks because of what it tries to steal from us, and how it tries to trick us into paying to get that stolen thing back, but worse, lesser, uglier, and emptier. It sucks because it exists to try to sell us on a future of even more content with even less meaning and it sucks because it does that by leveraging real human emotions of missing someone, missing their contributions to our culture, and wishing they were still here. It sucks because it uses our humanity against us, so some no-talent rent-seeking miscreants can extract even more money from the world and hoard it, without ever giving one iota, not money or effort or respect, not anything at all, to anyone else.

And it sucks because it is not, in any way, funny.. . More than 15 years after his death, stand-up comedian George Carlin has been brought back to life in an artificial intelligence-generated special called “George Carlin: I’m Glad I’m Dead.”

The hour-long special, which dropped on Tuesday, comes from Dudesy, a comedy AI that hosts a podcast and YouTube show with “Mad TV” alum Will Sasso and podcaster Chad Kultgen.

“I just want to let you know very clearly that what you’re about to hear is not George Carlin. It’s my impersonation of George Carlin that I developed in the exact same way a human impressionist would,” Dudesy said at the beginning of the special. “I listened to all of George Carlin’s material and did my best to imitate his voice, cadence and attitude as well as the subject matter I think would have interested him today. So think of it like Andy Kaufman impersonating Elvis or like Will Ferrell impersonating George W. Bush.”

In the stand-up special, the AI-generated impression of Carlin, who died in 2008 of heart failure, tackled prevalent topics like mass shootings, the American class system, streaming services, social media and AI itself.

Popular on Variety

“There’s one line of work that is most threatened by AI — one job that is most likely to be completely erased because of artificial intelligence: stand-up comedy,” AI-generated Carlin said. “I know what all the stand-up comics across the globe are saying right now: ‘I’m an artist and my art form is too creative, too nuanced, too subtle to be replicated by a machine. No computer program can tell a fart joke as good as me.'”

At one point, AI Carlin threw shade at billionaires such as Meta CEO Mark Zuckerberg, X/Twitter owner Elon Musk and Amazon founder Jeff Bezos.

“If you’re tired of seeing Jeff Bezos fly to space in his cock rocket, stop using Amazon for a month. Company goes under, Bezos goes away,” AI Carlin said.

Kelly Carlin, the late stand-up comedian’s daughter, posted a statement on X/Twitter Wednesday evening regarding the AI-generated special.

“My dad spent a lifetime perfecting his craft from his very human life, brain and imagination. No machine will ever replace his genius. These AI generated products are clever attempts at trying to recreate a mind that will never exist again,” she wrote. “Let’s let the artist’s work speak for itself. Humans are so afraid of the void that we can’t let what has fallen into it stay there.”

Kelly continued, “Here’s an idea, how about we give some actual living human comedians a listen to? But if you want to listen to the genuine George Carlin, he has 14 specials that you can find anywhere.”