Shein on App Store displayed on a phone screen and Shein website displayed on a screen in the background are seen in this illustration photo taken in Krakow, Poland on January 19, 2023. (Photo by Jakub Porzycki/NurPhoto via Getty Images)

Three artists have accused fast-fashion online retailer Shein of deploying an algorithm to recreate their designs on merchandise, bolstering concerns around artificial intelligence infringing on intellectual property.

In a lawsuit against Shein filed in California federal court on Tuesday, Krista Perry, Larissa Martinez, and Jay Baron argue that the company is using AI to identify trending art online and then creating nearly identical copies on a plethora of cheap merchandise without any acknowledgment or profits to the original artists.

“The brand has made billions by creating a secretive algorithm that astonishingly determines nascent fashion trends—and by coupling it with a corporate structure, including production and fulfillment schemes, that are perfectly executed to grease the wheels of the algorithm, including its unsavory and illegal aspects,” the complaint reads.

Shein has not responded to a request for comment.

The plaintiffs continue that the new algorithm was sanctioned by Chris Xu, the billionaire founder of Shein, who “made Shein the world’s top clothing company through high technology, not high design,” according to the complaint. Shein’s unparalleled ability to swiftly identify and recreate fashion and art trends is due to this technology, the artists—all of whom claim to be victims of Shein’s aesthetic cannibalization—say.

The artists acknowledge their slim chance of piercing Shein’s formidable legal protections. The plaintiffs argue in the complaint that the company escapes accountability for alleged copyright infringement and intellectual property theft by using a “byzantine shell game of corporate structure” that makes it difficult to find the proper party to sue.

The lawsuit comes amid a mounting copyright crisis over emergent AI image generators. The wildly popular text-to-image generators Midjourney and Stable Diffusion were built by scraping billions of images from the internet, including millions of works by digital artists who never gave their consent.

In mid-March, the United States Copyright Office ruled that AI-generated artworks are not eligible for copyright.

“These technologies, often described as ‘generative AI,’ raise questions about whether the material they produce is protected by copyright, whether works consisting of both human-authored and AI-generated material may be registered, and what information should be provided to the Office by applicants seeking to register them,” the statement of policy read.. A group of designers are suing Shein, the Chinese fast-fashion firm reportedly valued at $66 billion, for allegedly stealing independent artists’ works “over and over again, as part of a long and continuous pattern of racketeering.”

The designers — Krista Perry, Larissa Martinez and Jay Baron — claim in their lawsuit that Shein’s “design ‘algorithm’ could not work without generating the kinds of exact copies that can greatly damage an independent designer’s career—especially because Shein’s artificial intelligence is smart enough to misappropriate the pieces with the greatest commercial potential.”

Though the lawsuit highlights Shein’s use of artificial intelligence, it’s not exactly clear how Shein employs AI in its design process. The firm does not appear to be using AI to literally generate the alleged copies.

The lawsuit is packed with side-by-side comparisons, such as this one:

The lawsuit alleges that Shein’s practices violate the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). The law was enacted in 1970 and was first used against the American Mafia.

Seeking a jury trial, the designers say in their suit that the fast-fashion giant’s “misconduct is committed not by a single entity, but by a de-facto association of entities.” They claim that RICO is relevant to this case because it was created to “address the misconduct of culpable individual cogs in a larger enterprise.”

Reached for comment, Shein sent TechCrunch a boilerplate response, explaining that the company takes such claims seriously. The firm added that it will “vigorously defend” itself.

Shein is among the fastest-growing online retailers on the planet, and the firm is no stranger to allegations that it habitually screws over artists, workers and the environment. The company has previously copped to violating local labor laws.

Still, amid these brutal reports, Shein has attempted to market itself as an environmentally minded and socially conscious firm. It also wooed some influencers in a recent campaign that quickly backfired.