A man was sexually assaulted in jail after being falsely accused of armed robbery due to a faulty facial recognition match, his attorneys said, in a case that further highlights the dangers of the technology’s expanding use by law enforcement.

Harvey Murphy Jr., 61, said he was beaten and raped by three men in a Texas jail bathroom in 2022 after being booked on charges he’d held up employees at gunpoint inside a Sunglass Hut in a Houston shopping center, according to a lawsuit he filed last week.. In January of 2022, Harvey Murphy was arrested and thrown in jail while trying to get his driver’s license renewed at a local DMV. According to a $10 million lawsuit Murphy has since filed, a “loss prevention” agent working for a Sunglass Hut retail store used facial recognition software to accuse Murphy of perpetrating an armed robbery at a store in Houston, Texas. In reality, Murphy was more than 2,000 miles away at the time of the robbery. In January of 2022, Harvey Murphy was arrested and thrown in jail while trying to get his driver’s license renewed at a local DMV. According to a $10 million lawsuit Murphy has since filed, a “loss prevention” agent working for a Sunglass Hut retail store used facial recognition software to accuse Murphy of perpetrating an armed robbery at a store in Houston, Texas. In reality, Murphy was more than 2,000 miles away at the time of the robbery.

Advertisement

According to a lawsuit 61-year-old Murphy has filed against Macy’s and Sunglass Hut, “he was arrested and put into an overcrowded maximum-security jail with violent criminals. While in jail trying to prove his innocence, he was beaten, gang-raped, and left with permanent and awful life-long injuries. Hours after being beaten and gang-raped, the charges against him were dropped and he was released.” According to a lawsuit 61-year-old Murphy has filed against Macy’s and Sunglass Hut, “he was arrested and put into an overcrowded maximum-security jail with violent criminals. While in jail trying to prove his innocence, he was beaten, gang-raped, and left with permanent and awful life-long injuries. Hours after being beaten and gang-raped, the charges against him were dropped and he was released.”

“All of this because a company told the police, based on artificial intelligence, that you were the one who committed terrible crimes,” the lawsuit said. “All of this because a company told the police, based on artificial intelligence, that you were the one who committed terrible crimes,” the lawsuit said.

The armed robbery happened on January 22, 2022 in Houston, Texas. Two armed men went into a Sunglass Hut, threatened two employees with guns, and made off with cash and sunglasses. EssilorLuxottica is the parent company that owns Sunglass Hut, and like many large retail corporations they often employ individuals called “loss prevention” agents that assist with criminal investigations. According to the lawsuit, a EssilorLuxottica loss prevention agent named Anthony Pfleger reached out to the cops after the robbery and claimed he knew who had committed the crime. The armed robbery happened on January 22, 2022 in Houston, Texas. Two armed men went into a Sunglass Hut, threatened two employees with guns, and made off with cash and sunglasses. EssilorLuxottica is the parent company that owns Sunglass Hut, and like many large retail corporations they often employ individuals called “loss prevention” agents that assist with criminal investigations. According to the lawsuit, a EssilorLuxottica loss prevention agent named Anthony Pfleger reached out to the cops after the robbery and claimed he knew who had committed the crime.

“Pfleger told HPD they could stop their investigation because he found their guy,” the lawsuit states. “He stated that he worked in conjunction with Macy’s loss prevention to determine that the person who violently robbed the Sunglass Hut was Harvey Eugene Murphy Jr. (“Murphy”). Using artificial intelligence and facial recognition software, EssilorLuxottica and Macy’s took the video from the robbery and determined that Murphy was the robber.” “Pfleger told HPD they could stop their investigation because he found their guy,” the lawsuit states. “He stated that he worked in conjunction with Macy’s loss prevention to determine that the person who violently robbed the Sunglass Hut was Harvey Eugene Murphy Jr. (“Murphy”). Using artificial intelligence and facial recognition software, EssilorLuxottica and Macy’s took the video from the robbery and determined that Murphy was the robber.”

Advertisement

A Houston Macy’s had also been robbed, and Pfleger worked with its loss prevention agents to ID the culprits. Cameras in retail stores are so ubiquitous in America that we often don’t think about them anymore. These camera systems watch people while they shop and, occasionally, provide evidence to law enforcement of crimes. Many of them produce poor quality images and videos that make it hard to identify people. A Houston Macy’s had also been robbed, and Pfleger worked with its loss prevention agents to ID the culprits. Cameras in retail stores are so ubiquitous in America that we often don’t think about them anymore. These camera systems watch people while they shop and, occasionally, provide evidence to law enforcement of crimes. Many of them produce poor quality images and videos that make it hard to identify people.

Over the past ten years, retail stores began to hook up these cameras to facial recognition software systems. The idea is a computer could automatically identify known criminals when they enter a retail location and alert law enforcement or loss prevention agents to track the person’s movements. Over the past ten years, retail stores began to hook up these cameras to facial recognition software systems. The idea is a computer could automatically identify known criminals when they enter a retail location and alert law enforcement or loss prevention agents to track the person’s movements.

But facial recognition technology is infamously unreliable. All-too-human biases are embedded in the systems, and they often do a terrible job of IDing people. There have been But facial recognition technology is infamously unreliable. All-too-human biases are embedded in the systems, and they often do a terrible job of IDing people. There have been many cases of false arrests based on bad facial recognition technology, often involving Black people.

None of this stopped EssilorLuxottica from pushing Houston police to arrest Murphy. According to the lawsuit, Pfleger prepared one of the employees at the Sunglass Hut to positively identify Murphy in a photo lineup after he’d called the cops. None of this stopped EssilorLuxottica from pushing Houston police to arrest Murphy. According to the lawsuit, Pfleger prepared one of the employees at the Sunglass Hut to positively identify Murphy in a photo lineup after he’d called the cops.

Advertisement

Murphy was an easy target for Sunglass Hut. He has a criminal past and was in the system. Now, he’s a grandfather who, according to the lawsuit, has turned his life around. According to the lawsuit, old mugshots from the 1980s were publicly available and part of the facial recognition databases scanned by EssilorLuxottica’s systems. Murphy was an easy target for Sunglass Hut. He has a criminal past and was in the system. Now, he’s a grandfather who, according to the lawsuit, has turned his life around. According to the lawsuit, old mugshots from the 1980s were publicly available and part of the facial recognition databases scanned by EssilorLuxottica’s systems.

At the time of the robbery, Murphy was in Sacramento, California. He didn’t find out about the robbery, or that he’d been blamed for it, until he went to the DMV to renew his driver’s license. He was arrested and held without bond. Despite sending his court appointed lawyer the evidence that exonerated him, he still spent hours in jail. At the time of the robbery, Murphy was in Sacramento, California. He didn’t find out about the robbery, or that he’d been blamed for it, until he went to the DMV to renew his driver’s license. He was arrested and held without bond. Despite sending his court appointed lawyer the evidence that exonerated him, he still spent hours in jail.

“A few hours before Murphy was to be released from jail, he was followed into the bathroom by three violent criminals,” the lawsuit said. “He was beaten, forced on the ground, and brutally gang raped. After this violent attack, one of the criminals held a shank against his neck and told him that if he reported the rape to anyone, he would be murdered. Murphy crawled to his bunk and faced the wall praying these men would not attack him again.” “A few hours before Murphy was to be released from jail, he was followed into the bathroom by three violent criminals,” the lawsuit said. “He was beaten, forced on the ground, and brutally gang raped. After this violent attack, one of the criminals held a shank against his neck and told him that if he reported the rape to anyone, he would be murdered. Murphy crawled to his bunk and faced the wall praying these men would not attack him again.”

He was released later, but the damage was done. “All of this happened to Murphy because the Defendants relied on facial recognition technology that is known to be error prone and faulty,” the lawsuit said. He was released later, but the damage was done. “All of this happened to Murphy because the Defendants relied on facial recognition technology that is known to be error prone and faulty,” the lawsuit said.

Os Keyes, an Ada Lovelace Fellow and PhD Candidate at the University of Washington, called the case “tragic and entirely unsurprising.” Os Keyes, an Ada Lovelace Fellow and PhD Candidate at the University of Washington, called the case “tragic and entirely unsurprising.”

“This is precisely the kind of situation we've been warning about for years; that these systems, whatever their theoretical reliability, are in practice so finicky, and so consequential, that “This is precisely the kind of situation we've been warning about for years; that these systems, whatever their theoretical reliability, are in practice so finicky, and so consequential, that they cannot be fixed ,” Keyes told Motherboard. “The only thing I'd push back on is Murphy's lawyer's claim that it could happen to anyone; these systems are attractive precisely because they promise to automate and speed up ‘business as usual,’ which includes laundering existing police biases against people who are already in the system, minority groups, and anyone else who doesn't fit. This outcome is as inevitable as it is horrifying, and should be taken as a sign to restrict and reconfigure policing in general as well as FRT in particular.”. A 61-year-old man is suing Macy’s and the parent company of Sunglass Hut over the stores’ alleged use of a facial recognition system that misidentified him as the culprit behind an armed robbery and led to his wrongful arrest. While in jail, he was beaten and raped, according to his suit.

Harvey Eugene Murphy Jr was accused and arrested on charges of robbing a Houston-area Sunglass Hut of thousands of dollars of merchandise in January 2022, though his attorneys say he was living in California at the time of the robbery. He was arrested on 20 October 2023, according to his lawyers.

According to Murphy’s lawsuit, an employee of EssilorLuxottica, Sunglass Hut’s parent company, worked with its retail partner Macy’s and used facial recognition software to identify Murphy as the robber. The image that was put through the facial recognition system came from low-quality cameras, according to the lawsuit. While Houston police department was investigating the armed robbery, the EssilorLuxottica employee called police to say they could stop the investigation because the employee had identified one of two robbers with the technology. The employee also said the system had pointed to Murphy as committing two other robberies, according to the lawsuit.

When Murphy returned to Texas from California, he went to the department of motor vehicles (DMV) to renew his license. Within minutes of identifying himself to a DMV clerk, Murphy told the Guardian he was approached by a police officer who notified him there was a warrant out for his arrest for an aggravated robbery. Murphy said he was not told any details about his supposed crime except for the date the robbery occurred. He realized he was in Sacramento, California, at the time of the robbery – more than a thousand miles away.

“I almost thought it was a joke,” Murphy said.

Still, he was arrested and taken to the local county jail, where he was held for 10 days before being transferred to and processed in Harris county jail.

After a few days at Harris county, his alibi was confirmed by both his court-appointed defense attorney and the prosecutor, and the charges against him were ultimately dropped, according to the lawsuit.

Murphy was never convicted of a crime. Nonetheless, he says his detainment left him with deep scars. He was brutally beaten and gang-raped by three other men in the jail hours before he was released, he alleges. They threatened to kill him if he tried to report them to the jail staff, according to Murphy. After the alleged attack, Murphy remained in the same cell as them until he was released.

“That was kind of terrifying,” Murphy said. “Your anxiety is up so high, you’re still shaking the entire time. And I just got up on my bunk and just faced the wall and was just praying that something would come through and get me out of that tank.”

“The attack left him with permanent injuries that he has to live with every day of his life,” the lawsuit reads. “All of this happened to Murphy because the Defendants relied on facial recognition technology that is known to be error prone and faulty.”

Murphy did not realize facial recognition technology may have been used as evidence against him until two weeks ago, when he began working with his attorney, Daniel Dutko.

Dutko said he discovered from police documents that the Sunglass Hut worker shared camera footage with Macy’s, which employees from the department store chain used to identify Murphy. After that, Macy’s and Sunglass Hut contacted the police together, according to Dutko. Though Macy’s has retail partnerships with the eyewear brand in several locations, Macy’s had no connection to this robbery as the Sunglass Hut in question is a standalone location, he said.

“We feel very comfortable saying facial recognition software is the only possible explanation, and it’s the only reason why [Sunglass Hut] would go to Macy’s to try to identify him,” Dutko said.

skip past newsletter promotion Sign up to First Thing Free daily newsletter Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters Enter your email address Sign up Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy . We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. after newsletter promotion

Murphy’s case would be the seventh known case of a wrongful arrest due to facial recognition in the US, further highlighting the flaws of a technology already widely adopted by police departments and retailers. However, in all of the publicly known cases of wrongful arrests due to facial recognition up until now, the victims have been Black. Murphy’s would be the first known case of the failure of the technology leading to the wrongful arrest of a white man. Just last month, Rite Aid settled with the Federal Trade Commission over its use of a facial recognition system that misidentified Black, Latino and Asian customers as people previously identified as “likely to engage” in shoplifting. The pharmacy chain is forbidden from using facial recognition in its stores for five years as part of the settlement. And in the summer of 2023, a woman named Porcha Woodruff was arrested on charges of car jacking due to false identification by a facial recognition system.

Macy’s has previously been sued over its use of facial recognition technology. In a 2020 lawsuit, a Chicago woman accused the company of working with facial recognition provider Clearview AI without her or other customers’ consent in violation of Illinois’ biometric privacy law.

Nathan Freed Wessler, deputy director of the America Civil Liberties Union’s Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project said this was another example of the “extreme dangers of face recognition technology”.

“In case after case, we’ve seen police reflexively trusting unreliable face recognition results, and then allowing false matches from the technology to taint witness identification procedures,” Wessler said in a statement. “As the facts alleged in this case show, the consequences of being wrongfully arrested are horrible. Lawmakers must put a stop to police and corporations’ hazardous reliance on face recognition results to put people in jail.”

Murphy is seeking $10m in damages.

Macy’s said it had no comment on pending litigation and EssilorLuxottica did not immediately respond to a Guardian request for comment.