Worker killed by robot at an auto factory in Haryana

As a metal sheet got dislocated, the worker tried to adjust it and got pierced by the robot.

A 24 year old worker employed with SKH Metals, an auto ancillary company at IMT Manesar was killed by a robot on Wednesday, a leading daily reports.

Ramji Lal, a resident of Unnao district of Uttar Pradesh had been working as a loader in the company for one and half years. During the shift, there were apparently 63 workers and 39 robots working. A co-worker of Lal said "The robot is pre-programmed to weld the metal sheets lifted by it. During production, a metal sheet got dislocated and Ramji Lal reached from behind the robot to adjust it. However, the pre-programmed robot pierced Lal's abdomen with welding sticks." Another co-worker told the daily that the victim had gone too close to the robot and got pierced by the robotic arm leading to him dying on the spot. "We are looking at CCTV footage and gathering information from workers and the company," a police official told the daily.

The worker union though is blaming the management for this unfortunate accident. Kuldeep Jhangu, general secretary of Maruti Udyog Kamgar Union alleged that no initiative has been taken to make the robots accident proof. He demanded compensation for Lal's family and a thorough probe into the entire incident.

Police have already booked the company management and contractor with charges of causing death due to negligence.. READ ALSO:

READ ALSO:

GURGAON: This one’s straight out of a Terminator film. Sharp welding sticks jutting out of the robotic arm of a machine pierced a worker killing him at a factory here on Wednesday. The worker had apparently moved too close to the robot while adjusting a metal sheet that had come unstuck.The victim was rushed to a nearby hospital but he was dead by the time he was wheeled in.Ramji Lal (24), from Unnao, UP, worked as a loader for SKH Metals, an auto ancillary company, at the Industrial Model Township (IMT) Manesar. He joined a year-and-a-half ago.Lal was at work in the welding unit that has special-purpose machines and robotic welding lines. Around 63 workers and 39 robots were on duty when the accident took place.“The robot is pre-programmed to weld metal sheets it lifts. One such sheet got dislodged and Lal reached from behind the machine to adjust it. This was when welding sticks attached to the pre-programmed device pierced Lal’s abdomen,” a co-worker said. Another shop floor colleague claimed that had Lal approached the robot from the front and hadn’t stooped to adjust the sheet, the accident wouldn’t have happened.Kuldeep Janghu, general secretary of Maruti Udyog Kamgar Union, told TOI: “The accident occurred due to the negligence of the management. No effort has been made to make the robots accident proof. We want compensation and an inquiry into the incident.” The union demanded safety measures put in place for all units using robots, he added. Preliminary investigation shows the victim got too close to the robot and was trapped. The robotic arm went through him and he died on the spot , police said. “We are looking at CCTV footage and gathering information from workers and the company,” a police officer said.Assistant Commissioner of Police Rajesh Kumar said the company management and the contractor who had engaged the victim had been booked on charges of causing death due to negligence. The deceased lived at Aliyar Dhana, a village near Manesar, in a rented accommodation with his wife and four sisters. He had got married around a year ago.Such fatalities are rare as robots are generally kept in enclosures to prevent contact with workers. On June 29, a worker at a Volkswagen factory in Germany died after a robot grabbed him and crushed him against a metal plate.Angry workers halted work at the factory in protest and a meeting between workers and the management was underway at the time of filing this report.. A man has been killed by a robot at a car parts factory in India.

The 24-year-old worker was reportedly adjusting a metal sheet being welded by the machine when he was stabbed by one of its arms.

Ramji Lal, from Uttar Pradesh, had been working at a SKH Metals factory in Manesar for around 18 months when the accident happened, the Times of India reported.

“The robot is pre-programmed to weld metal sheets it lifts,” one of his colleagues told the newspaper.

“One such sheet got dislodged and Lal reached from behind the machine to adjust it. This was when welding sticks attached to the pre-programmed device pierced Lal's abdomen.”

Some local media reports claimed Mr Lal was electrocuted during the accident and died at the scene, although his cause of death has not been confirmed.

Police are viewing CCTV footage of the factory and interviewing dozens of workers who were there at the time as the investigation continues.

Assistant Commissioner Rajesh Kuwar told the Indo-Asian News Service: “The company management and the contractor have been booked on charges of causing death due to negligence.”

The Maruti Udyog Kamgar Union has demanded a full enquiry into Mr Lal’s death and increased safety measures governing work with robots.

SKH Metals could not be reached for a comment.

It came after an employee at a Volkswagen factory in Germany was killed in another accident involving a robot.

Source: The Independent (UK). This one's straight out of a Terminator film. Sharp welding sticks jutting out of the robotic arm of a machine pierced a worker killing him at a factory here on Wednesday. The worker had apparently moved too close to the robot while adjusting a metal sheet that had come unstuck.

The victim was rushed to a nearby hospital but he was dead by the time he was wheeled in.

Ramji Lal (24), from Unnao, UP, worked as a loader for SKH Metals, an auto ancillary company, at the Industrial Model Township (IMT) Manesar. He joined a year-and-a-half ago. Lal was at work in the welding unit that has special-purpose machines and robotic welding lines. Around 63 workers and 39 robots were on duty when the accident took place.

"The robot is pre-programmed to weld metal sheets it lifts. One such sheet got dislodged and Lal reached from behind the machine to adjust it. This was when welding sticks attached to the pre-programmed device pierced Lal's abdomen," a co-worker said. Another shop floor colleague claimed that had Lal approached the robot from the front and hadn't stooped to adjust the sheet, the accident wouldn't have happened.

themanufacturer.com

Kuldeep Janghu, general secretary of Maruti Udyog Kamgar Union, told TOI: "The accident occurred due to the negligence of the management. No effort has been made to make the robots accident proof. We want compensation and an inquiry into the incident." The union demanded safety measures put in place for all units using robots, he added. Preliminary investigation shows the victim got too close to the robot and was trapped. The robotic arm went through him and he died on the spot, police said. "We are looking at CCTV footage and gathering information from workers and the company," a police officer said.

Assistant Commissioner of Police Rajesh Kumar said the company management and the contractor who had engaged the victim had been booked on charges of causing death due to negligence. The deceased lived at Aliyar Dhana, a village near Manesar, in a rented accommodation with his wife and four sisters. He had got married around a year ago. Such fatalities are rare as robots are generally kept in enclosures to prevent contact with workers. On June 29, a worker at a Volkswagen factory in Germany died after a robot grabbed him and crushed him against a metal plate.

Angry workers halted work at the factory in protest and a meeting between workers and the management was underway at the time of filing this report.

(Originally published in The Times of India)