To hear more audio stories from publishers like The New York Times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.

On a Thursday afternoon in January, Robert Julian-Borchak Williams was in his office at an automotive supply company when he got a call from the Detroit Police Department telling him to come to the station to be arrested. He thought at first that it was a prank.

An hour later, when he pulled into his driveway in a quiet subdivision in Farmington Hills, Mich., a police car pulled up behind, blocking him in. Two officers got out and handcuffed Mr. Williams on his front lawn, in front of his wife and two young daughters, who were distraught. The police wouldn’t say why he was being arrested, only showing him a piece of paper with his photo and the words “felony warrant” and “larceny.”. A Michigan man has sued Detroit police after he was wrongfully arrested and falsely identified as a shoplifting suspect by the department’s facial recognition software in one of the first lawsuits of its kind to call into question the controversial technology’s risk of throwing innocent people in jail.. Racial bias and facial recognition. Black man in New Jersey arrested by police and spends ten days in jail after false face recognition match

Accuracy and racial bias concerns about facial recognition technology continue with the news of a lawsuit filed by a New Jersey man, Nijeer Parks, against local police, the prosecutor and the City of Woodbridge in New Jersey.

According to the New York Times, Nijeer Parks is the third person known to be falsely arrested for a crime he did not commit based on a bad face recognition match. The other two were Robert Williams and Michael Oliver. All three falsely arrested men are black it is reported.

This particular case began on a Saturday in January 2019, when two police officers showed up at the Hampton Inn in Woodbridge (New Jersey) after receiving a report about a man stealing snacks from the gift shop.

The crime

The alleged shoplifter was a black man, nearly 6 feet tall, wearing a black jacket, who was reportedly visiting a Hertz office in the hotel lobby, trying to get the rental agreement for a gray Dodge Challenger extended.

The officers confronted him, and he apologised, according to the police report. According to the New York Times, the suspect said he would pay for the snacks and gave the officers a Tennessee driver’s license.

When the officers checked the license, they discovered it was a fake drivers licence. This, coupled a bag of suspected marijuana in the man’s jacket, resulted in the officers trying to arrest the suspect. But the suspect ran away and drove off in his rental car, hitting a parked police car in the process, as well as a column in front of the hotel.

One of the police officers had to reportedly jump out of the way of the vehicle to avoid being hit.

The rental car was later found abandoned in a parking lot a mile away.

What happened next is that a detective in the Woodbridge Police Department sent the photo from the fake driver’s license to state agencies that had access to face recognition technology.

The next day, state investigators said they had a facial recognition match: which happened to be Nijeer Parks, who lived in Paterson, N.J., 30 miles away, and worked at a grocery store.

The detective compared Parks’s New Jersey state ID with the fake Tennessee driver’s license and agreed it was the same person. After a Hertz employee confirmed that the license photo was of the shoplifter, the police issued a warrant for Parks’s arrest.

“I don’t think he looks like me,” Parks was quoted as saying. “The only thing we have in common is the beard.”

Parks it should be noted has previous criminal convictions for selling drugs.

The arrest

The only problem for the police was that Parks was 30 miles away at the time of the incident, but that did not stop Parks being arrested by local police and spending ten days in jail, coupled paying around $5,000 to defend himself.

Parks was able to get proof from Western Union that he had been sending money at a pharmacy in Haledon (New Jersey), when the incident happened.

Parks told the judge he was willing to go to trial to defend himself. But a few months later in November 2019, his case was dismissed for lack of evidence.

Parks is now reportedly suing the police, the prosecutor and the City of Woodbridge for false arrest, false imprisonment and violation of his civil rights.

“I was locked up for no reason,” Parks reportedly said. “I’ve seen it happen to other people. I’ve seen it on the news. I just never thought it would happen to me. It was a very scary ordeal.”

The case drew the attention of the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU).

“Multiple people have now come forward about being wrongfully arrested because of this flawed and privacy-invading surveillance technology,” Nathan Freed Wessler, senior staff attorney for the ACLU’s Speech, Privacy, and Technology Project told Silicon UK.

“There are likely many more wrongful interrogations, arrests, and possibly even convictions because of this technology that we still do not know about,” said Freed Wessler. “Unsurprisingly, all three false arrests that we know about have been of Black men, further demonstrating how this technology disproportionately harms the Black community. Law enforcement use of face recognition technology must be stopped immediately.”

Controversial tech

On this side of the pond, the use of facial recognition, especially by authorities, has also proven to be controversial.

In August the Court of the Appeal ruled that the use of automatic facial recognition (APR) by South Wales Police had breached privacy rights, data protection laws and equality legislation.

And in 2019 the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) warned that any organisation using facial recognition technology, and which then scans large databases of people to check for a match, is processing personal data, and that “the potential threat to privacy should concern us all.”

Indeed in 2019 an academic study found that 81 percent of ‘suspects’ flagged by Met’s police facial recognition technology were innocent, and that the overwhelming majority of people identified are not on police wanted lists.

And in August 2019, the ACLU civil rights campaign group in the United States ran a demonstration to show how inaccurate facial recognition systems can be.

It ran a picture of every California state legislator through a facial-recognition program that matches facial pictures to a database of 25,000 criminal mugshots.

That test saw the facial recognition program falsely flag 26 legislators as criminals.

Despite that, in July 2019 then Home Secretary Sajid Javid gave his backing to police forces using facial recognition systems, despite growing concern about the technology.

Tech boycott

Facial recognition systems have also been previously criticised in the US after research by the Government Accountability Office found that FBI algorithms were inaccurate 14 percent of the time, as well as being more likely to misidentify black people.

And tech firms have begun boycotting the supplying of the tech to police forces.

Microsoft first refused to install facial recognition technology for a US police force a year or so ago, due to concerns about artificial intelligence (AI) bias.

This boycott was subsequently been joined by Amazon and IBM, among others.

Microsoft has also deleted a large facial recognition database, that was said to have contained 10 million images that were used to train facial recognition systems.

San Francisco banned the use of facial recognition technology, meaning that local agencies, such as the local police force and other city agencies such as transportation would not be able to utilise the technology in any of their systems.

But the police remain in favour of its use.

In February this year, the UK’s most senior police officer, Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cressida Dick, said criticism of the tech was “highly inaccurate or highly ill informed.”

She also said facial recognition was less concerning to many than a knife in the chest.. TEANECK — The Township Council has banned the use of facial recognition software by police in a unanimous vote, joining a nascent movement to banish a technology that has been criticized as potentially biased.

Even as private companies continue to create huge databases of images from social media, and facial recognition is employed for surveillance and airport passenger screening, a growing body of evidence shows that the algorithms do a poorer job of identifying women and Black and Asian faces.

In January, New Jersey Attorney General Gurbir Grewal barred police statewide from using a facial recognition app from a company called Clearview AI, which The New York Times reported had amassed a database of billions of photos from sites like Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. The company licenses its product to police departments.

However, Teaneck is the first town in New Jersey to ban the controversial technology outright, said Councilman Keith Kaplan.

"Now is not the time to let this technology in our municipality," he said. "Some of the people being targeted have absolutely no connection to a crime and are incarcerated based on an algorithm. We need to protect the civil rights of our residents."

For subscribers:Is that a kosher kitchen in the new fieldhouse? Yes, no and maybe, say Teaneck officials

New Jersey:Murphy vetoes NJ bill requiring body cameras for patrol officers over funding worries

In 2019, Paterson resident Nijeer Parks was arrested on charges of shoplifting in Woodbridge after police identified him using facial recognition software, but Parks was nowhere near Woodbridge at the time of the incident. He spent 10 days in jail and is now suing the city and its Police Department.

He was one of several Black men who have been wrongfully arrested based on faulty facial recognition software.

“I don’t think he looks like me,” Parks said when comparing the image to himself at the time of his arrest. “The only thing we have in common is the beard.”

Facial recognition software is only as good as the underlying algorithm. A study by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a government agency, involving a variety of commercial software found that Black and Asian faces were 10 to 100 times more likely to be misidentified than Caucasian faces.

In 2019, San Francisco, a hub for the technology revolution, became the first major city to ban facial recognition software.

Other areas, however, aren't convinced that facial technology is a detriment. Late last year, the Boston Globe reported that Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker had refused to sign a law banning most government use of facial recognition

In Teaneck, the ban on the technology is for now largely symbolic. The town is just getting around to equipping all of its police officers with body cameras to increase transparency.

"Right now, the benefits of having body cams outweigh the detriments, but having facial technology, finding people based on faulty algorithms, is a bit of a different story," Kaplan said.

Police did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Isaiah McCall is a local reporter for NorthJersey.com. For unlimited access to the most important news from your local community, please subscribe or activate your digital account today.

Email: mccallI@northjersey.com

Twitter: @AfroReporter. Robert Williams was doing yard work with his family one afternoon last August when his daughter Julia said they needed a family meeting immediately. Once everyone was inside the house, the 7-year-old girl closed all the blinds and curtains and then told her sister and parents that she'd figured it out: Wooly Willy, a character from her toy, had stolen the watches that got her dad arrested.

“She was like ‘We need to get to the bottom of this,’” her mother Melissa says. More recently, Melissa says, Julia has said she believes people who wear shirts that say “Detroit” represent the people who arrested her father.

Williams was arrested in January 2020 for allegedly stealing five watches from a Shinola store in Detroit, after he was wrongfully identified by facial recognition software. He was among the first people known to be wrongfully accused because of the software, which is an increasingly common tool for police. Michael Oliver and Nijeer Parks were wrongly arrested in 2019 after also being misidentified by facial recognition technology.

All three cases were eventually dropped, but in Parks’ case, that took almost a year, including 10 days in jail. The cases shared some commonalities. Oliver and Parks both had prior criminal records. Oliver and Williams were investigated by the same Detroit detective. All three men are fathers, and all three are Black. “It’s not a coincidence,” Parks says.

Law enforcement in nearly every US state now has access to facial recognition software. The Georgetown Law Center on Privacy and Technology says images of one in two US adults are in facial recognition databases used to identify criminal suspects. Critics say police rely too heavily on the technology, particularly since research has shown it misidentifies women and people of color more often than white men. Yet in most of the US, neither police nor prosecutors are required to tell people accused of crimes if facial recognition has played a role in an investigation.

WIRED spoke with Williams, Oliver, and Parks to better understand how the arrests changed their lives and the lives of people around them. Each says the fallout extended beyond the time they spent in jail to affect relationships with family, friends, coworkers, and neighbors.

The three men knew relatively little about facial recognition before their arrests, but today they want to ban—or at least suspend—its use in criminal investigations.

When Williams was arrested, he told Melissa, Julia, and his 4-year-old daughter Rosie that he’d be right back, but he was held by police for 30 hours. Julia still cries when she sees video of her dad being arrested on their front lawn. Her parents wonder how much the experience affected her.

In testimony before Congress last summer, Williams said he and his wife considered getting Julia a therapist, and that thought bubbled up again late last year amid worry that the arrest was still top of mind for her. Her parents said Julia still seems worried that police will take her father away again.. Several cities have banned police from using facial recognition software, which has well-known racial bias issues (and many false-positive issues as well). Detroit, however, has a very public debate in 2019 about the use of facial recognition, and instead decided to regulate its use rather than ban it altogether. Late last year, the city adopted a policy, which bans the use of facial recognition to “surveil the public through any camera or video device,” bans its use on livestream and recorded videos, and restricts (but does not ban) its use at protests. According to the policy, the software must be used only “on a still image of an individual,” and can only be used as part of an ongoing criminal investigation. The software checks images across a state database of photos, which include mugshot images. As part of these regulations, the police department is required to release weekly reports about the use of the technology, which show that it has been almost exclusively used on Black people.. IT admins can save time and energy when changing Mac permissions by doing it via the command line or remotely via SSH. Learn how it’s done and what the notation means for command-line permissions.. Detroit police wrongfully arrested Robert Julian-Borchak Williams in January 2020 for a shoplifting incident that had taken place two years earlier. Even though Williams had nothing to do with the incident, facial recognition technology used by Michigan State Police “matched” his face with a grainy image obtained from an in-store surveillance video showing another African American man taking US$3,800 worth of watches.

Two weeks later, the case was dismissed at the prosecution’s request. However, relying on the faulty match, police had already handcuffed and arrested Williams in front of his family, forced him to provide a mug shot, fingerprints and a sample of his DNA, interrogated him and imprisoned him overnight.

Experts suggest that Williams is not alone, and that others have been subjected to similar injustices. The ongoing controversy about police use of Clearview AI certainly underscores the privacy risks posed by facial recognition technology. But it’s important to realize that not all of us bear those risks equally.

Read more: The coronavirus pandemic highlights the need for a surveillance debate beyond 'privacy'

Training racist algorithms

Facial recognition technology that is trained on and tuned to Caucasian faces systematically misidentifies and mislabels racialized individuals: numerous studies report that facial recognition technology is “flawed and biased, with significantly higher error rates when used against people of colour.”

This undermines the individuality and humanity of racialized persons who are more likely to be misidentified as criminal. The technology — and the identification errors it makes — reflects and further entrenches long-standing social divisions that are deeply entangled with racism, sexism, homophobia, settler-colonialism and other intersecting oppressions.

How technology categorizes users

In his game-changing 1993 book, The Panoptic Sort, scholar Oscar Gandy warned that “complex technology [that] involves the collection, processing and sharing of information about individuals and groups that is generated through their daily lives … is used to coordinate and control their access to the goods and services that define life in the modern capitalist economy.” Law enforcement uses it to pluck suspects from the general public, and private organizations use it to determine whether we have access to things like banking and employment.

Gandy prophetically warned that, if left unchecked, this form of “cybernetic triage” would exponentially disadvantage members of equality-seeking communities — for example, groups that are racialized or socio-economically disadvantaged — both in terms of what would be allocated to them and how they might come to understand themselves.

Some 25 years later, we’re now living with the panoptic sort on steroids. And examples of its negative effects on equality-seeking communities abound, such as the false identification of Williams.

Pre-existing bias

This sorting using algorithms infiltrates the most fundamental aspects of everyday life, occasioning both direct and structural violence in its wake.

The direct violence experienced by Williams is immediately evident in the events surrounding his arrest and detention, and the individual harms he experienced are obvious and can be traced to the actions of police who chose to rely on the technology’s “match” to make an arrest. More insidious is the structural violence perpetrated through facial recognition technology and other digital technologies that rate, match, categorize and sort individuals in ways that magnify pre-existing discriminatory patterns.

Structural violence harms are less obvious and less direct, and cause injury to equality-seeking groups through systematic denial to power, resources and opportunity. Simultaneously, it increases direct risk and harm to individual members of those groups.

Predictive policing uses algorithmic processing of historical data to predict when and where new crimes are likely to occur, assigns police resources accordingly and embeds enhanced police surveillance into communities, usually in lower-income and racialized neighbourhoods. This increases the chances that any criminal activity — including less serious criminal activity that might otherwise prompt no police response — will be detected and punished, ultimately limiting the life chances of the people who live within that environment.

And the evidence of inequities in other sectors continues to mount. Hundreds of students in the United Kingdom protested on Aug. 16 against the disastrous results of Ofqual, a flawed algorithm the U.K. government used to determine which students would qualify for university. In 2019, Facebook’s microtargeting ad service helped dozens of public and private sector employers exclude people from receiving job ads on the basis of age and gender. Research conducted by ProPublica has documented race-based price discrimination for online products. And search engines regularly produce racist and sexist results.

Read more: Google's algorithms discriminate against women and people of colour

Perpetuating oppression

These outcomes matter because they perpetuate and deepen pre-existing inequalities based on characteristics like race, gender and age. They also matter because they deeply affect how we come to know ourselves and the world around us, sometimes by pre-selecting the information we receive in ways that reinforce stereotypical perceptions. Even technology companies themselves acknowledge the urgency of stopping algorithms from perpetuating discrimination.

To date the success of ad hoc investigations, conducted by the tech companies themselves, has been inconsistent. Occasionally, corporations involved in producing discriminatory systems withdraw them from the market, such as when Clearview AI announced it would no longer offer facial recognition technology in Canada. But often such decisions result from regulatory scrutiny or public outcry only after members of equality-seeking communities have already been harmed.

It’s time to give our regulatory institutions the tools they need to address the problem. Simple privacy protections that hinge on obtaining individual consent to enable data to be captured and repurposed by companies cannot be separated from the discriminatory outcomes of that use. This is especially true in an era when most of us (including technology companies themselves) cannot fully understand what algorithms do or why they produce specific results.

Privacy is a human right

Part of the solution entails breaking down the current regulatory silos that treat privacy and human rights as separate issues. Relying on a consent-based data protection model flies in the face of the basic principle that privacy and equality are both human rights that cannot be contracted away.

Even Canada’s Digital Charter — the federal government’s latest attempt to respond to the shortcomings of the current state of the digital environment — maintains these conceptual distinctions. It treats hate and extremism, control and consent, and strong democracy as separate categories.

To address algorithmic discrimination, we must recognize and frame both privacy and equality as human rights. And we must create an infrastructure that is equally attentive to and expert in both. Without such efforts, the glossy sheen of math and science will continue to camouflage AI’s discriminatory biases, and travesties such as that inflicted on Williams can be expected to multiply.. 'The Computer Got It Wrong': How Facial Recognition Led To False Arrest Of Black Man

Updated 9:05 p.m. ET Wednesday

Police in Detroit were trying to figure out who stole five watches from a Shinola retail store. Authorities say the thief took off with an estimated $3,800 worth of merchandise.

Investigators pulled a security video that had recorded the incident. Detectives zoomed in on the grainy footage and ran the person who appeared to be the suspect through facial recognition software.

A hit came back: Robert Julian-Borchak Williams, 42, of Farmington Hills, Mich., about 25 miles northwest of Detroit.

In January, police pulled up to Williams' home and arrested him while he stood on his front lawn in front of his wife and two daughters, ages 2 and 5, who cried as they watched their father being placed in the patrol car.

His wife, Melissa Williams, wanted to know where police were taking her husband.

" 'Google it,' " she recalls an officer telling her.

Robert Williams was led to an interrogation room, and police put three photos in front of him: Two photos taken from the surveillance camera in the store and a photo of Williams' state-issued driver's license.

"When I look at the picture of the guy, I just see a big Black guy. I don't see a resemblance. I don't think he looks like me at all," Williams said in an interview with NPR.

"[The detective] flips the third page over and says, 'So I guess the computer got it wrong, too.' And I said, 'Well, that's me,' pointing at a picture of my previous driver's license," Williams said of the interrogation with detectives. " 'But that guy's not me,' " he said, referring to the other photographs.

"I picked it up and held it to my face and told him, 'I hope you don't think all Black people look alike,' " Williams said.

Williams was detained for 30 hours and then released on bail until a court hearing on the case, his lawyers say.

At the hearing, a Wayne County prosecutor announced that the charges against Williams were being dropped due to insufficient evidence.

Civil rights experts say Williams is the first documented example in the U.S. of someone being wrongfully arrested based on a false hit produced by facial recognition technology.

Lawyer: Artificial intelligence 'framed and informed everything'

What makes Williams' case extraordinary is that police admitted that facial recognition technology, conducted by Michigan State Police in a crime lab at the request of the Detroit Police Department, prompted the arrest, according to charging documents reviewed by NPR.

The pursuit of Williams as a possible suspect came despite repeated claims by him and his lawyers that the match generated by artificial intelligence was faulty.

The alleged suspect in the security camera image was wearing a red St. Louis Cardinals hat. Williams, a Detroit native, said he would under no circumstances be wearing that hat.

"They never even asked him any questions before arresting him. They never asked him if he had an alibi. They never asked if he had a red Cardinals hat. They never asked him where he was that day," said lawyer Phil Mayor with the ACLU of Michigan.

On Wednesday, the ACLU of Michigan filed a complaint against the Detroit Police Department asking that police stop using the software in investigations.

In a statement to NPR, the Detroit Police Department said after the Williams case, the department enacted new rules. Now, only still photos, not security footage, can be used for facial recognition. And it is now used only in the case of violent crimes.

"Facial recognition software is an investigative tool that is used to generate leads only. Additional investigative work, corroborating evidence and probable cause are required before an arrest can be made," Detroit Police Department Sgt. Nicole Kirkwood said in a statement.

In Williams' case, police had asked the store security guard, who had not witnessed the robbery, to pick the suspect out of a photo lineup based on the footage, and the security guard selected Williams.

Victoria Burton-Harris, Williams' lawyer, said in an interview that she is skeptical that investigators used the facial recognition software as only one of several possible leads.

"When that technology picked my client's face out, from there, it framed and informed everything that officers did subsequently," Burton-Harris said.

Academic and government studies have demonstrated that facial recognition systems misidentify people of color more often than white people.

One of the leading studies on bias in face recognition was conducted by Joy Buolamwini, an MIT researcher and founder of the Algorithmic Justice League.

"This egregious mismatch shows just one of the dangers of facial recognition technology which has already been shown in study after study to fail people of color, people with dark skin more than white counterparts generally speaking," Buolamwini said.

"The threats to civil liberties posed by mass surveillance are too high a price," she said. "You cannot erase the experience of 30 hours detained, the memories of children seeing their father arrested, or the stigma of being labeled criminal."

Maria Miller, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor's office, said the case was dismissed over insufficient evidence, including that the charges were filed without the support of any live witnesses.

Wayne County Prosecutor Kym Worthy said any case sent to her office that uses facial recognition technology cannot move forward without other supporting evidence.

"This case should not have been issued based on the DPD investigation, and for that we apologize," Worthy said in a statement to NPR. "Thankfully, it was dismissed on our office's own motion. This does not in any way make up for the hours that Mr. Williams spent in jail."

Worthy said Williams is able to have the case expunged from his record.

Williams: "Let's say that this case wasn't retail fraud. What if it's rape or murder?"

According to Georgetown Law's Center on Privacy and Technology, at least a quarter of the nation's law enforcement agencies have access to face recognition tools.

"Most of the time, people who are arrested using face recognition are not told face recognition was used to arrest them," said Jameson Spivack, a researcher at the center.

While Amazon, Microsoft and IBM have announced a halt to sales of face recognition technology to law enforcement, Spivack said that will have little effect, since most major facial recognition software contracts with police are with smaller, more specialized companies, like South Carolina-based DataWorks Plus, which is the company that supplied the Detroit Police Department with its face-scanning software.

The company did not respond to an interview request.

DataWorks Plus has supplied the technology to government agencies in Santa Barbara, Calif., Chicago and Philadelphia.

Facial recognition technology is used by consumers every day to unlock their smartphones or to tag friends on social media. Some airports use the technology to scan passengers before they board flights.

Its deployment by governments, though, has drawn concern from privacy advocates and experts who study the machine learning tool and have highlighted its flaws.

"Some departments of motor vehicles will use facial recognition to detect license fraud, identity theft, but the most common use is law enforcement, whether it's state, local or federal law enforcement," Spivack said.

The government use of facial recognition technology has been banned in half a dozen cities.

In Michigan, Williams said he hopes his case is a wake-up call to lawmakers.

"Let's say that this case wasn't retail fraud. What if it's rape or murder? Would I have gotten out of jail on a personal bond, or would I have ever come home?" Williams said.

Williams and his wife, Melissa, worry about the long-term effects the arrest will have on their two young daughters.

"Seeing their dad get arrested, that was their first interaction with the police. So it's definitely going to shape how they perceive law enforcement," Melissa Williams said.

In his complaint, Williams and his lawyers say if the police department won't ban the technology outright, then at least his photo should be removed from the database, so this doesn't happen again.

"If someone wants to pull my name and look me up," Williams said, "who wants to be seen as a thief?". A police officer holding a video camera at a protest. Credit: Mobilus In Mobili. CC BY-SA 4.0.

Since a Minneapolis police officer killed George Floyd in March 2020 and re-ignited massive Black Lives Matter protests, communities across the country have been re-thinking law enforcement, from granular scrutiny of the ways that police use force to overarching criticism of racial bias in policing. Minneapolis, where Floyd was killed, even held a vote on whether to do away with the police department and replace it with a social-service oriented agency. Amid the push for reform, one trend in policing is in urgent need of overhaul: police departments’ expanding use of artificial intelligence, namely facial recognition, to aid crime fighting.

Police agencies are increasingly deploying advanced artificial intelligence-driven identification to fight crime. AI algorithms are now employed to identify individuals by face, fingerprint, and DNA, with varying degrees of success. Among these AI technologies, facial recognition technology is arguably the most troubling. Studies have documented the racial and gender biases of these systems, and unlike with fingerprint or DNA-analysis algorithms, police are using facial recognition in the field to make on-the-spot decisions. It’s already having a corrosive impact on society.

Take Robert Williams, a Black man living in Detroit, Michigan, who was called by the Detroit police and told to turn himself in on a shoplifting charge. “I assumed it was a prank call,” he told a congressional subcommittee in July, but police later showed up at his house and arrested him in front of his wife and children. They held him for 30 hours. The evidence? A surveillance photo depicting someone else. “I held that piece of paper up to my face and said, ‘I hope you don’t think all Black people look alike,'” Williams said, according to The Detroit News. Around the country, 18,000 police departments are using this generally unregulated technology, the committee chair, Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, said. “To add untested and unvetted facial recognition technology to our policing would only serve to exacerbate the systemic issues still plaguing our criminal justice system,” she said.

Williams is free; the charges against him were dropped—so were the charges against Michael Oliver and Nijeer Parks, two other Black men arrested on the basis of faulty facial recognition matches. But Williams’s tense encounter with the police could have ended badly, as such moments have for others. “As any other Black man would be, I had to consider what could happen if I asked too many questions or displayed my anger openly—even though I knew I had done nothing wrong,” Williams wrote in The Washington Post. In an era of racially biased law enforcement—police killed more than 1,000 people in the year following Floyd’s murder, a disproportionate number of them Black—police continue to turn to largely unregulated facial recognition technology—software known to be significantly less accurate when it comes to identifying Black people and other minorities—to make decisions with potentially lethal consequences.

How facial recognition works. To understand the risks of police use of facial recognition, it’s helpful to understand how the technology works. Conceptually, these systems can be broken down into three main parts: the known-faces database, the algorithm, and the query image.

Known-face images can come from drivers’ license pictures, passport photos, mugshots, stills from CCTV cameras, social media images, and many other places.

Facial recognition algorithms are packaged into software by vendors, but the algorithms themselves can come from anywhere. Most often the underlying algorithms are created by researchers within universities, governmental organizations, and companies. But just about any entity can become a vendor by licensing, buying, copying, or developing a facial recognition algorithm and packaging it for easy use.

Query images are often images captured on camera systems built into police cruisers, security cameras, and in police body-worn cameras. Image quality depends heavily on the image capture system used, lighting conditions, distance, and even the pose of the face being captured. These images can be matched with a face in the known-faces dataset.

Under the right set of circumstances, these elements can conspire to produce a false match, underscoring the risk that facial recognition technology poses to civil liberties.

The danger of false positives. Facial recognition errors come in two types: false negatives and false positives. False negatives are instances where a query image, for example, one captured on a police cruiser’s camera system, is an image of a person contained in the known-faces database, maybe a suspect in a crime, but the facial recognition system’s algorithm doesn’t detect the match. False positives, on the other hand, are instances where the algorithm matches a query image with a face from the known-faces database erroneously—potentially matching a person’s face with that of a criminal. These two types of error both could result in negative outcomes for the public, but false negative errors do not introduce bad outcomes that wouldn’t have already happened in the absence of facial recognition systems. False positives, conversely, introduce new dangers to both police and everyday civilians.

So, let’s look at just how bad these false positive rates are and what variables influence these rates.

A 2019 report by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on the accuracy of facial recognition technology found that the rate of false positives varied heavily based on factors like the query image quality, the underlying dataset, and the race of the faces being queried. The range of false positive error rates was between 3 errors out of 100,000 queries (0.003 percent) in optimal conditions to 3 errors out of every 1,000 queries (0.3 percent). Moreover, the query image sources that were tested by the federal institute were of better quality than what police in the field are likely to process.

In the same report, researchers tested the accuracy of facial recognition systems given different demographic variables such as sex, age, and race and found that varying the race of the face matching pairs created false positive rates that were often two orders of magnitude greater for darker skinned individuals. Images of women produced higher false positive rates than those of men. Images for East African women produced roughly 100 times more false positives (3/1,000) than images for white men (3/100,000).

These false positive error rates are especially dangerous when combined with the practical differences related to when and where AI systems are deployed. For fingerprint and DNA analysis, AI systems operate on collected samples and are generally performed in a lab setting where these systems’ findings can be reanalyzed by human experts; facial recognition systems, on the other hand, can be be deployed by officers in the field. The final judgement on how accurate a match is can depend simply on an officer’s discernment.

Varying degrees of accuracy, little oversight. Generally, software vendors combine existing or proprietary facial detection algorithms with user interfaces in software packages for use by law enforcement. Altogether, there are more than 80 software vendors with more than 600 facial detection algorithms that have been tested by the NIST, many of which are available for local law enforcement to purchase. The performance of these algorithms varies widely, and the underlying algorithms are often not made available for code and training data inspection (as with most proprietary software) to protect the intellectual property of software vendors. What’s more, vendors such as Clearview AI advertise directly to local law enforcement organizations, which then are responsible for vetting and procuring the facial recognition systems they deploy. Further, without an overarching framework for the deployment of these systems, many law enforcement organizations are not required to seek guidance before deploying a system locally. Given the variability in vendors and their software and the lack of oversight for departments selecting vendors, it’s little surprise that the accuracy of their systems varies a lot. And it is worth reiterating, varying accuracy of these systems can, and will likely, result in real world harm.

As organizations like the American Civil Liberties Union, academic researchers, and activists raise the increasingly urgent issue of police facial recognition technologies in Congress, state houses, and town halls, a handful of cities, states, and even some countries have moved to ban the use of facial recognition by public agencies. Most recently, the state of Maine restricted the use of facial recognition to a specific set of instances. Elsewhere, however, efforts to reign in the technology have fallen short. In West Lafayette, Ind., Mayor John Dennis recently vetoed a bill written to ban the use of facial recognition by public agencies. Meanwhile, the technology is becoming more powerful. Clearview AI sells a system that expanded the universe of known faces to some 10 billion photos on the public internet.

In written testimony at the congressional hearing with Williams, law professor Barry Friedman at New York University compared the regulatory environment surrounding facial recognition software to the “wild west.” It’s clear that facial recognition technology, however accurate it might be under ideal circumstances, can fall woefully short in practice. This is a failure of policy and technology and it’s likely that Williams won’t be the last person to bear the costs of it.

Editor’s note: This article incorrectly stated that police had killed more than 1,000 Black people in the year following George Floyd’s murder. In fact, according to data from the group Mapping Police Violence analyzed by Al Jazeera, police killed 1,068 people, not all of whom were Black. According to the tracking group, Black people are three times more likely to be killed by police than white people.