ARTICLE TITLE: Meet the Secret Algorithm That's Keeping Students Out of College
EIGHTEEN-YEAR-OLD ANAHITA NAGPAL fears her plans to start training this fall to be a doctor have been derailed by a statistical model.

Nagpal, who lives in Göttingen, Germany, had been offered a premed place and scholarship at NYU. Her acceptance was dependent on her results in the International Baccalaureate diploma, a two-year high school program recognized by colleges and taken by more than 170,000 students this year, most in the US. But she scored more poorly than expected.

Teen regrets about grades aren’t unusual, but the way the foundation behind the IB Diploma Programme calculated this year’s grades was. The results, released Monday, were determined by a formula that IB, the foundation behind the program, hastily deployed after canceling its usual springtime exams due to Covid-19. The system used signals including a student’s grades on assignments and grades from past grads at their school to predict what they would have scored had the pandemic not prevented in-person tests.

Nagpal and many other students, parents, and teachers say those predictions misfired. Many students received suspiciously low scores, they say, shattering their plans for the fall and beyond. Nagpal's backup plan if she missed out on NYU was to study medicine in Germany, but she doesn't think her lower-than expected grades will qualify her for a place. "Like so many, I was extremely shocked," she says. Nagpal later received an email from NYU saying it has not made a decision on her admission. NYU said it does not comment on individual cases.

More than 15,000 parents, students, and teachers have signed an online petition asking IB to “take a different approach with their grading algorithm and to make it fairer.” The foundation declined to answer questions about its system but said it had been checked against five years of past results and that disappointed students could use its existing appeals process, which comes with a fee. The foundation released summary statistics showing that this year’s average score was slightly higher than last year’s, and it says the distribution of grades was similar.

One math teacher at a school in the Middle East says IB should disclose the full workings of its model for outside scrutiny. He and a colleague with a math PhD have been puzzling over its design since several students lost scholarships to top universities, after receiving results much lower than expected by their teachers. Some students caught out are now unsure how they’ll pay for college. “My only guess is a flawed model,” he says.

“I basically cannot study what I want to anywhere anymore.” Anahita Nagpal, 18, Göttingen, Germany

Concerns about flawed math models are growing as more companies and governments apply computers to traditionally human problems such as bail decisions, identifying criminal suspects, and deciding what is hate speech. Rooting out bias and inaccuracy in such systems is a growing field of activism and academia.

People questioning IB’s algorithm-derived grades are now raising some of the same issues. They’re wondering how the system was designed and tested, why its workings weren’t fully disclosed, and whether it makes sense to use a formula to determine the grades that can shape a person’s opportunities in life.

When Covid-19 seized hold of the world in March, many teens in their final year of high school were left in a precarious position. Shelter-in-place orders made it challenging or impossible to complete the final assignments or tests that could determine their college and life choices.