Black people in the US suffer more from chronic diseases and receive inferior health care relative to white people. Racially skewed math can make the problem worse.

Doctors often make life-changing decisions about patient care based on algorithms that interpret test results or weight risks, like whether to perform a particular procedure. Some of those formulas factor in a person’s race, meaning patients’ skin color can affect access to care.

A new study of patients in the Boston area is one of the first to document the harm that can cause. It examined the effect on care of a widely used but controversial formula for estimating kidney function that by design assigns Black people healthier scores.

The study analyzed health records for 57,000 people with chronic kidney disease from the Mass General Brigham health system that includes Harvard teaching hospitals Massachusetts General and Brigham and Women's. One third of Black patients, more than 700 people, would have been placed into a more severe category of kidney disease if their kidney function had been estimated using the same formula as for white patients.

That could have affected decisions such as when to refer someone to a kidney specialist, or refer them for a kidney transplant. In 64 cases, patients’ recalculated scores would have qualified them for a kidney transplant wait list. None had been referred or evaluated for transplant, suggesting that doctors did not question the race-based recommendations.

“That was really staggering,” says Mallika Mendu, an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School and kidney specialist at Brigham and Women’s whose work on the study convinced her to stop using the race-based calculation with her own patients. “We know there are already other disparities in access to care and management of the condition. This is not helping.”

In 64 cases, Black patients’ scores would have qualified them for a kidney transplant wait list. None had been referred or evaluated for transplant.

The study is the most recent of several signs that math tools exacerbate health inequalities. Last year, software used by many health systems to prioritize access to special care for chronic conditions was found to systematically privilege white patients over Black patients. It didn’t explicitly take account of race, but replicated patterns in access to health care caused by factors like poverty.

The kidney algorithm, by contrast, is one of many clinical decision algorithms that explicitly take account of race. A recent review listed more than a dozen such tools, in areas including cancer and lung care. In August, a group of Black retired NFL players sued the league, claiming it used an algorithm that assumes white people have higher cognitive function to decide compensation for brain injuries.

The issue is winning more attention, including from federal lawmakers. Representative Richard Neal (D-Massachusetts), chair of the House Ways and Means Committee, says the kidney study underlines the need to reconsider use of race in all medical algorithms. “Many clinical algorithms can result in delayed or inaccurate diagnoses for Black and Latinx patients, leading to lower-quality care and worse health outcomes,” he says.

Neal has asked medical societies and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to investigate the impact on patients of clinical algorithms that use race. Last month, Senator Elizabeth Warren (D-Massachusetts) and others asked the Department of Health and Human Services to investigate race-based medical algorithms.. For years, physicians and medical students, many of them Black, have warned that the most widely used kidney test — the results of which are based on race — is racist and dangerously inaccurate. Their appeals are gaining new traction, with a wave of petitions and papers calling renewed attention to the issue.

In recent weeks, physicians and medical students at a handful of prominent universities have called on their administrations to end the use of race-based kidney testing, pointing to such changes at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in 2017 and at Mass General Brigham and the University of Washington earlier this summer.

advertisement

On the heels of those petitions, as well as a widely circulated New England Journal of Medicine analysis of the kidney test and other medical tools that are biased against Black patients, the National Kidney Foundation and the American Society of Nephrology announced this month that they will convene a task force to evaluate the use of race in kidney testing.

“[Science] has been a conspirator of racism since the genesis of racism. And it is our duty as physicians to be keenly aware and critical of that history, and how we still operate within it despite our best intentions,” said Paloma Orozco Scott, a medical student who co-authored a petition to Mount Sinai calling to end the use of race as a factor in the test.

The test — which measures what’s known as estimated glomerular filtration rate, or eGFR — has historically considered four factors: age, gender, race, and levels of creatinine — the waste that kidneys filter out of blood. But the race of a patient can only be bucketed into two groups: Black, or not Black. That’s based on a flawed assumption that dates back to the formula’s creation, when medical experts presumed that Black people have higher muscle mass on average, leading to higher kidney function.

advertisement

Normal adult kidneys function around or above a score of 90, while patients can be added to the kidney transplant waitlist once they hit 20 or below. Patients who are Black automatically have points added to their score, which can make results appear more normal than they might be — which in turn, could delay needed treatment.

“When science comes out with a statement that really aligns with what people believe — in this case, oh, of course Black people are different — no one questions it,” said Vanessa Grubbs, an associate professor of nephrology at University of California, San Francisco, and co-author of one petition. “This equation assumes that Black people are a homogeneous group of people, and doesn’t take into account, how Black is Black enough?”

Grubbs and others in the field have advocated for years to move away entirely from using muscle mass as a consideration, instead arguing that the test should only take age, gender, and creatinine levels into account.

“There’s been a lot of conversation around how this New England Journal of Medicine article has seemed to be part of this tipping point, when folks like myself have been talking and writing about this issue for well over a decade,” said Grubbs. “It’s just an example of who is listened to, and who is taken seriously in this country.”

A handful of schools and health systems have changed their eGFR testing protocols in recent years, a few having done away with the adjustment for muscle mass entirely. UCSF and Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital last year opted to start adjusting for muscle mass, instead of race — but physicians have petitioned the school to do away with that adjustment as well, arguing it is not scientifically founded.

The issue has also gained the attention of medical students like Naomi Nkinsi, now a rising third-year student at the University of Washington School of Medicine.

One of five Black students in her class of around 100 at the school’s Seattle location, Nkinsi said she was used to speaking up in class about racism by the time they were learning about the kidney, in the winter of her first year of school. The lecture ended with a brief explanation of eGFR testing, including how race was factored into the results.

“I knew that racism played a role in medicine and how people interact with patients, but I didn’t realize how ingrained it was in the actual algorithms,” Nkinsi said. “And that’s my body that they’re talking about. That’s my mom and dad, those are my siblings.”

Nkinsi said that after she spoke up in class about the inherent racism in the eGFR tests, she followed up with her professors. School leaders planned more lectures and discussions on treatment disparities, and the school’s Anti-Racism Action Committee started talking about it and planning town halls. Then in May of this year, the school officially made the change.

Scott and her classmate Carina Seah, rising second-year students at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, decided to petition the school in June, after a lecture on how math can be racist in medical algorithms like the eGFR tests, by Staci Leisman, an associate professor in nephrology.

“Because we see science is such a rigorous process, and because we see these equations as such objective measures, it’s really hard to imagine that they would be influenced by racism,” Seah said.

Leisman has given that particular lecture — inspired by a student who challenged the formula as racist during class — for the past five or six years and always receives a spirited response, she said. But this was the first year a student, spurred by her lecture, took steps to change how eGFR results are calculated.

Newsletters Sign up for Morning Rounds Your daily dose of news in health and medicine. Please enter a valid email address. Privacy Policy

While many physicians and students are excited to see the building momentum, they also believe there are even more pressing, systemic issues of medical racism that need to be addressed.

“I think there’s a lot of frenzy over institutions trying to rid themselves of racism, as if it is something that you can policy out, that you can legislate out, but in fact it is something that lives within us as individuals in the system,” said Scott.

It’s unclear how widespread the changes will be, and whether national organizations will take on the cause. The National Kidney Foundation declined to comment on eGFR testing. The press release announcing its task force acknowledges that race is a social construct and not a biological one, but makes no definitive statements on changing the test, only on examining it.

“I would be surprised if medicine across the board made substantive changes,” said Grubbs. But she is encouraged seeing the next generation of doctors speak up on this issue.

“I’m sure I don’t even know all the different places where medical students in particular are really kicking up dust around, [saying,] ‘You all are teaching us to be racist. We came here to learn how to be competent caring, doctors.’”. In this registry-based analysis of the impact of the CKD-EPI eGFR race multiplier for African-Americans, we have demonstrated that when the race multiplier is removed, up to one in three African-American patients would be reclassified to a more severe CKD stage. Nearly one in four African-Americans would be reclassified to CKD stage 4 (from stage 3), which has implications for timely CKD management, referral to nephrology, and dialysis planning. By demonstrating that none of the African-Americans reclassified to eGFR ≤ 20 ml/min/1.73 m2 had a transplant referral, we have highlighted the potential impact on care delivery based on small differences in eGFR. This finding indicates that nephrologists are utilizing race-adjusted eGFR in clinical decision-making, based on published guidelines.

Race has been treated as a biological variable associated with creatinine generation, similar to height, weight, and diet.12,15 Studies asserting that African-Americans have greater muscle mass than White patients include one study of 915 patients from Tennessee using total body neutron analysis that showed higher total body potassium content in African-American patients, and another study of 47 patients using the same technique.18,19,20 The MDRD study equation referenced these studies and directly measured GFR using the gold standard of iothalamate measurements.16 A total of 197 were classified as “Black,” 1304 were classified as “White,” and the remaining 127 were not defined. The authors state “Ethnicity was assigned by study personnel, without explicit criteria, probably by examination of skin color.” The authors recognized that, “the prediction equation has been tested in relatively few black persons.”

The use of racial classification in defining or calculating seemingly objective clinical data has faced criticism. Studies, such as a recent article by Vyas et al., detail the use of clinical calculators that integrate race, such as pulmonary function tests and a vaginal birth after cesarean section calculator, and their potential impact on health inequities30,31,32; the authors warn against the use of race as a proxy for genetic difference. Co-authors (NE and PR) highlighted that eGFR equations enable assessments of CKD prevalence over time in populations, but the inclusion of a race term creates problems at the bedside for patients who identify as mixed race or reject racial categorization.24 There are examples of genetic inheritance informing kidney outcomes, such as the established association between the genetic mutation of apolipoprotein-1 (APOL1) and an increased risk of ESRD progression among some African-Americans with West African ancestry.33 Studies have indicated that APOL1 mutations account for over two-thirds of excess ESRD risk among African-Americans in the USA.34 Despite this evidence, most clinical laboratories are not performing APOL1 testing.35,36

Our study raises questions related to using the race multiplier to estimate kidney function. Notably, the PHS EHR has two views: (1) a registry view in which eGFR incorporates race adjustment; (2) lab view, with a note indicating eGFR should be multiplied by 1.159 in African-Americans; our findings suggest that clinicians were applying the race multiplier. Race-based eGFR calculation has major implications as it relates to care delivery, including drug dosing, nephrology referral, dialysis planning, and transplantation. Furthermore, it reinforces racist historical beliefs that African-Americans are inherently and biologically different than Whites.25

We focused intentionally on the risk of misclassification of disease severity for patients with advanced CKD, as opposed to early-stage CKD, to highlight examples of how small differences in estimating kidney function can lead to less care delivered. However, there are implications for patients with higher levels of eGFR, noted by authors Levey et al.37,38; specifically, they cite potential underestimation of eGFR in African-Americans that could lead to overdiagnosis of CKD, inadequate medication dosing, and less access to specific therapies like sodium-glucose transporter 2 inhibitors or metformin, typically contraindicated at eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73 m2. Eliminating race from eGFR equations requires careful implementation and effective communication across health systems; for example, we found the total number of African-Americans classified as having CKD in our registry would increase by 16%. We recognize that by removing the race multiplier, some of these patients may have an underestimation of eGFR, just as inclusion can lead to overestimation in others. However, this transition can be managed effectively. First, clinicians must recognize that regardless of race, eGFR is an imprecise measure at the patient level; in the CKD-EPI study, approximately 84% of measurements were within 30% of “true” measured GFR.21 Second, referral to nephrology should enable a thorough assessment of kidney function, appropriate counseling, and expert advice on medication dosing. What is known is many African-Americans face the challenge of more rapid acceleration to ESRD compared with other racial groups, so on average, they would likely benefit from earlier counseling and preparation for renal replacement therapy as well as earlier nephrology and transplant referral. The risk of underestimation versus overestimation must be recognized and mitigated by the use of biomarkers such as cystatin C that can estimate GFR without the use of race.39

Special Note Regarding Transplantation

We found that African-Americans with eGFR ≤ 20 ml/min/1.73 m2 with the race multiplier applied had significantly higher rates of transplant referral compared to other patients; this may reflect recognition of faster progression to ESRD. However, African-Americans with an eGFR ≤ 20 ml/min/1.73 m2 only with the race multiplier removed were never referred for transplantation (0%), compared to 19% using the default equation. This is an important finding, as the difference between a patient having an eGFR ≤ 20 versus > 20 ml/min/1.73 m2 with the race multiplier removed is approximately 3 ml/min. This finding suggests that clinicians may be making decisions with long-term implications based on small differences in physiologic parameters, which may have the unintended consequence of exacerbating disparities.

Strengths and Limitations

This study benefits from the utilization of a health system–wide registry capturing data from two large academic medical centers and community practices. We conducted a practical analysis of care delivered in the context of eGFR and the potential impact on important clinical outcomes. Finally, we sought input from nephrologists and health equity experts across our network.

The study’s primary limitations stem from the limited geographic cohort, and relatively small proportion of African-Americans and other racial minorities. Finally, patients who receive part of their care outside of our system could have incomplete outcome data. For example, it is possible that African-Americans are more likely to receive fragmented care, and we may underestimate care delivered.40,41 We also do not have data in our CKD registry about other delivery outcomes such as referral for dialysis modality education or goals of care discussions. Finally, our regression analyses are limited to age, sex, and relevant comorbidities and do not include adjustment based on other important attributes, such as socioeconomic status, due to limitations of the registry.

Future Directions

Our objective with this study is to quantify potential ramifications of racial assumptions and race-based eGFR equations on care delivered. We advocate for further epidemiologic study to better delineate whether there are differences in creatinine-based eGFR based on social or ancestry-based differences. Based on this study and other efforts to advance health equity, nephrologists, health equity researchers, and health systems may consider eliminating race-adjusted eGFR, using biomarkers less dependent on race such as cystatin C, and testing genetic factors such as APOL1 across patients of all races.26 Efforts to advance “precision medicine,” allowing for tailoring of diagnosis and treatment, can facilitate moving beyond biological race,42 and further efforts are needed to address structural racism. In the past few months, several health systems have decided to eliminate race-adjusted eGFR, including PHS43,44; those health systems should be aware of the implications of reclassification, including insurance coverage ramifications for those now diagnosed with CKD, and inclusion in drug trials. These health systems will need broad educational efforts led by nephrologists to guide management contingent on specific eGFR thresholds. Finally, for those who continue to utilize race-adjusted eGFR, it is important to be transparent with patients and account for flaws with classification. Patients should be informed about the use as they may not want racial categories applied to them, especially if it impacts the services they may not receive.